---
title: Yakuza Zero
published: "2024-03-02"
series: Yakuza / Like a Dragon
tagline: The Perfect Prequel
tags:
  - reviews
  - games
---

With the (mistaken) assessment that I didn't have enough to play this year, I
decided to attempt to complete the entire Yakuza/Like a Dragon series in 2024. I
started with Yakuza Zero, and I'll be playing the games in chronological order.
I'll also be focusing on the most recently remade version of each game, not
going back for any of the original versions.

So lets kick this off with my thoughts on Yakuza Zero!

# Gameplay

The gameplay had a bit of general jank. Walking around you'll sometimes get
caught on things. Having to find a telephone whenever you wanted to save the
game made me feel like I was playing a 2000s game, not one from 2015. The
stamina system for running around served no purpose other than to make moving
through the city more annoying. There are endless confirmation boxes in front of
every interaction. Really, these were all small things, but they added up to
make almost everything you do just a little bit janky.

## Combat

Combat was a lot of fun once I got used to it. It's not a tight, well designed
experience--it's a bold, wild one. It's not a system for avoiding damage and
finding openings. It's a system for muscling your way through and unleashing
huge, devastating attacks. The heat system was very fun, and I found myself
really getting into combo patterns by the end. Some of those heat moves are
fucking gnarly. The mixup between the 6 (more, if you include weapons) different
combat styles kept it constantly fresh and let me work out the best tool for
each encounter. Some of the better designed fights felt like they would
intentionally be "solved" by switching to the correct style, and it always felt
good to figure it out. By the end, random side enemies felt kinda unfair. For
example, dudes with guns would be placed on the other side of the room from you,
with a horde of melee dudes in between, and the guns could shoot through allies
without issue. Kinda cheap. But my character was already so strong that I was
able to muscle through regardless. Whenever I found someone with a gun, I was
like "you cheap, dishonorable bastard, let me introduce you to my knee", and I
think that was the intended effect.

(sidenote on combat, I never understood why QTEs get so much hate. I think they
can be pretty great. They are used in this game's combat to great effect,
especially during bossfights)

# Side Content

The game has an incredible amount of side content, but I only dabbled in what I
stumbled across. I didn't do much with the many, many mini-game progression
systems. From what I understand, those can be used to make a ton more money in
game (and money is xp) to really max out your character, but I felt the
difficulty was fine without ever doing that. Maybe that's something I'll dig
into more once I get to the latest games, but for now I'm just focused on
getting through all the story. The side stories were very fun though. The main
story may be a dark, serious drama, but the side stories are all sitcoms. I
heard there are 100 of them in the game?? I think I did like 10. I'd seen
estimates of playtime for main-story-only of this game at over 30 hours, but
even dabbling in a bit of side content I finished in 28.

# Story

Speaking of story, the main story felt perfectly tailored for my tastes. This
was the real highlight for me and why I was able to overlook some of the other
jank. It's a masterpiece of action crime drama. The characters have intense
personality and personal beliefs that are all consistent, and it's a perfect
powder keg scenario to kick off the drama. The mystery elements unfolded
perfectly. I was able to guess some of the twists purely on dramatic tone, but
others really shocked me in a good way. It's like they gave me the freebie
guesses to make me confident and then dropped the real reveals on me. And it all
hit so emotionally hard. I could gush on this story for way longer, but I still
have 10 games of story to go!

# Rating

9/10 game. I'm putting it at #13 in my ranking, just behind TLOU2. With a little
less jank and a little more budget, it could have been even higher. Even so, an
absolute gem of a game. I can see why this was the title that took Yakuza from a
niche series with a cult following to the massively popular status it holds
today.
