---
title: Mass Effect 3
brief:
tagline: Disappointing, but not for the reasons you probably expect
series: Finally Playing Mass Effect
tags:
  - reviews
  - games
published: 2024-10-03
---

I overall enjoyed my time with this game, especially the DLC. However, it had
some flaws that not even a remaster and years of updates could solve.
Surprisingly, I had a very different experience from nearly everything I'd
heard.

I primarily refer, of course, to the infamous endings. I can't say I went into
this completely spoiler-free, but mostly-so. I knew the ending was
controversial---widely-hated, even. I had heard that the endings were presented
as an illusion of choice. I didn't really know more than that. Perhaps it was
this reputation softening my expectations, but I really didn't find it _that_
bad. Instead, I found disappointment **nearly everywhere else**. I figured that
if I had heard so much about the ending being bad, surely the rest was
fine---perhaps even good?

I was legitimately surprised at how wrong I was, repeatedly.

It's clear to me that this game was rushed. There are so many elements of the
story that feel weirdly out of place or missing obvious detail---like they bear
the phantom pain of the content cut away to meet the extremely aggressive
deadlines this game was developed under. More on that later. It's wild to me
that they tried to release this only 2 years after Mass Effect 2. From what I
heard, they were actually chasing a 1-1.5 year gap, and _reluctantly_ pushed it
to 2 years. It probably should have had another year on top of that, or more.

It was also extremely ambitious, especially for the time. It frequently strives
for increased levels of fidelity and realism that just weren't yet ready at the
time. Each step it took to do so firmly planted a foot deeper in the uncanny
valley. It released in that cursed era of games during which the "state of the
art" managed to look artistically worse than the previous techniques, but all
the "big" projects felt the need to do the popular thing, no matter the
aesthetic cost. I legitimately think Mass Effect 2 was a better looking game
from every angle. More on that later, too.

Even the writing was overambitious. The series championed "choices matter" and
is still brought up as a prime example of that style of game many years later.
Many choices were waved aside or even outright ignored in some cases, relegated
to offscreen changes and retcons. This was true even in Mass Effect 2, but it
all came crashing together in this one. All the "your decisions will matter, we
promise!" debt came calling all at once and Bioware unfortunately declared
creative bankruptcy.

The combination of overambitious and rushed is a poisonous one. It was
impossible to avoid the consequences of this. Yet, I had an overall positive
experience with Mass Effect 3. I think it's worth pointing out that positive
side. I'm going to complain a lot in this review. Please remember this
paragraph.

---

# The Review

## Audio & Visuals

I found this game's audio oddly... empty? It was uncanny the entire time.

There was a notable lack of background music for a significant number of scenes.
I doubt it was a lack of budget or time, there were plenty of applicable tracks
in the game (and series) that could have been re-used. That would have been
acceptable at worst, and could have really elevated some scenes at best.
Instead, there was this emptiness---which felt intentional. I get the feeling
that they were going for a "war is hell" kind of thing. No need for music, just
let people sit in emptiness with nothing but gunfire and explosions. I don't
really think it worked out. I honestly _adore_ stuff like that usually. It did
nothing for me here. Worse, the lack of background was so notable that it
actually distracted me from the scenes I was watching.

This game also has the worst case of attempted action-movie audio balancing I've
ever heard. I say attempted, because I don't think it even accomplished what it
usually does for action movies. It's like they started going down that path and
then slapped a compressor on afterwards. Everything is super muted, with the
only loud sounds being the reapers, but then the reaper sounds are so compressed
that they don't even achieve that edge that they were probably going for. Upon
opening the game for the first time, I actually went and checked the settings
multiple times to make sure it wasn't something I had misconfigured or anything.
Nope, it's just like that. Bizarre. It made every environment I walked through
feel extremely fake. It decimated my immersion.

On the visual side, I found it to be largely inconsistent and incoherent. So
many things felt oddly out of place, like their colors just didn't quite work
together as they should. Every once in a while, something would look like it was
poorly photoshopped in, rather than being a natural part of the scene. This
usually happened with character models, so I assume there was something slightly
off with the character lighting, or perhaps the art direction simply wasn't
tight enough.

The animations were also surprisingly stiff. Perhaps I only noticed this so much
because this game had _so many_ uniquely animated cutscenes. Perhaps it's
because only some scenes felt mo-capped, leaving the others much more stiff in
comparison. Perhaps mo-cap just wasn't good enough yet (back to the
over-ambitious thing again).

The worst offending animation was Shepard's walking animation in casual attire,
at least as FemShep. It always looks like she shit herself. It also looks like
her spine is about 6 inches too long, like they stretched her out so that all
the camera angles could be the same as the male version of Shepard.

All of these audio and visual flaws combined together in the opening of the
game. It felt like I had jumped _back_ a generation of games. It made such a
weak first impression compared to Mass Effect 2 that it deterred me from coming
back to the game for a month.

I truly think that Mass Effect 2 is a better looking and sounding game in pretty
much every way. It's possible that Mass Effect 2 got a ton more effort put into
it with the remaster, and 3 was left with fewer improvements. I'm not sure.
Though even looking at screenshot comparisons from the original releases, I
prefer the art direction of Mass Effect 2, even if it's a touch lower resolution
and isn't as "shiny".

## Story

> Note: I'm dropping full spoilers here. Here's a link to [Gameplay](#gameplay)
> if you want to skip this section.

Speaking of weak openings, I was supremely disappointed that my choice to make
Anderson a Councilor was completely reversed off-screen. Legitimately, they took
the exact story that happens in Mass Effect 2 if you make Udina Councilor, and
just made all of it happen after the end of Mass Effect 2 instead. It was a
complete retcon of one of my choices. So much for those mattering...

It wasn't a dealbreaker on its own. Just surprising, and contributed heavily to
how weak I felt the opening was.

Even ignoring all of that, I thought the opening was a mess. We've spent years
in-universe fighting off the reapers. We literally killed one at the center of
all civilization in the first game, and another in the center of the galaxy in
the second. It's not like these were secret events. The whole galaxy was aware.
There were huge numbers of witnesses to the collectors being involved with the
reapers, especially humans. Yet, we're led to believe that people disbelieved
**so hard** that they didn't even pick up signals of _a massive reaper fleet
descending on Earth_? It makes no sense. It's a shallow excuse to play off the
destruction of Earth for shock value. It was so ridiculous that it wasn't even
effective shock value.

Then we're shipped off on an out-of-place detour (completely cutting any
remaining sense of tension) to pick up some conveniently-recently-discovered
research. Liara is here, for some reason. It makes no sense in the story. It
feels like they just needed a place to reunite her with the crew, and picked
here arbitrarily. Then we dedicate the rest of the mission to picking up an
overly sexy new robot body for EDI, because that was necessary. Then we have
Ashley/Kaidan receive a mortal wound out of nowhere. Gotta make the player feel
_some_ kind of stakes, right? This whole mission was pretty trash, to be honest.
It felt like the worst offender of the game being rushed and them needing to tie
a lot of random things together after other, more interesting content got cut.
It was their design-equivalent of a waste bin for ideas they couldn't fit
anywhere else.

Fortunately, what came after was much better. I really liked traveling around
the galaxy, recruiting allies and making deals to secure as many advantages as
we could get. It reminded me of the best things about Mass Effect 2's story.

Unfortunately, they weren't all winners. It wasn't long before more of my
previous decisions would be paved over again. In Mass Effect 2, I had chosen to
destroy research that could have assisted the krogans in curing the genophage.
What did that amount to in Mass Effect 3? Wrex gave me a couple stern lines of
dialogue. That's _pretty much_ it. I'm then presented with all the options of
saving the krogan anyways and the rest of the mission plays out the same. Once
again, not a dealbreaker, but disappointing.

...and then we get into Act II. Oh boy.

It's finally revealed why the Anderson retcon happened! A betrayal by Udina,
only possible if he was the Councilor! It came completely out of the blue! How
shocking!

I found this really lame. It didn't feel like it made sense in the story, plus
it was apparently so important that they had to retcon to make it happen.

Not only that, it introduces the _supremely_ lame Kai Leng. I don't like this
guy. Not even in a "love to hate him" way. I just don't think he added anything
to the story. It's like they made a boss design and then found a way to fit him
into the story later. It feels like perhaps there were supposed to be some more
interesting things to do with him, but it was all cut. We're left with this
empty facade of a "cool" character.

All of that aside, the actual idea of a betrayal on the Citadel is a good one.
**That** part actually works really well, even if the execution was poor. The
aftermath of it, the way the Citadel changes, and what it does for the story are
all great.

Smooth sailing again for a bit!

I really enjoyed the story of the quarians and the geth. It was compelling
throughout the series, and this was a great culmination. The missions were fun,
and full of good lore, too. Facing down a reaper with nothing but a targeting
laser is one of the most badass setpieces in the series.

Then we get another mission that feels oddly disjointed. We need to get some
important data from an asari relic, and we see firsthand how much is being
sacrificed to get us there. Then we get interrupted by Kai Leng (lame!) at the
most convenient time for him. This completely undermines the stakes set up by
the rest of the mission. We're sold on this being a super secret thing that
nobody else knows about. We're shown just how hard it is to push into this
region currently. Then, **JUST** as we're about to learn the most vital
information, "John Edgelord" pops up out of nowhere. I guess it wasn't really
that secret then? Why did Cerberus know about this ahead of time? Why did they
not do this sooner? Why now, precisely? Wait, did that VI just say it _detected_
someone indoctrinated nearby? They have that technology? Why did none of our
interactions with Prothean VIs (or a live Prothean, with DLC), or any of our
many prothean technology excavations reveal the existence of this technology,
even if without providing it to us directly? Nothing makes sense here. It's
another convenient, "waste bin of ideas" mission that was necessary to pull this
rushed game's story into a semblance of coherent.

The next mission, and the last one in Act II, was actually pretty good.
Following Miranda through the facility and learning about Cerberus's plans along
the way was tense. It was also a pretty cool setting, with the terrifyingly
empty living spaces and such.

On to Act III! Sadly, by far the shortest.

Raiding the Cerberus base was fun. Cathartic, if nothing else. Finally get to
show these bastards some consequences. Finally get to shut Leng down. Arguing
with the Illusive Man was also pretty fun. It had a number of good bits of lore
and necessary context. It's a tad unfortunate that the only way they could
deliver all of this information was through a series of recordings. It seems
like a lazy way to give the player all the information. Like, "here you go!
Here's all of the missing information dropped into your lap! We needed to give
it to you somehow or what comes next wouldn't make any sense! So here's a
massive disjointed lore dump!" That said, it's at least an enjoyable lore dump.
What comes up is pretty interesting, and the sheer quantity of it made me enjoy
the mission more.

Mysteriously, the Citadel is moved to Earth, just as we learn that it is the
"Catalyst" needed to stop the reaper threat. How convenient---we can set up the
final events of the game over Earth instead of just out in space. I don't see
any reason for this other than story convenience. It struck me as very odd and
contrived.

Okay then, whatever, off to Earth!

Having a final sendoff with all the companions was very nice. Those
conversations and final moments were all pretty great. No complaints there.
Though, again, the beam of light and the Citadel feel _extremely_ contrived just
to make such a plan possible---it was at least enjoyable to see happen once I
got over that.

The desperate plan and the rush to pull it together against all odds was also
very satisfying. I loved the brutality of the final push with the reaper
decimating all of my allies. It made everything feel even more desperate, and I
was very tense trying to get to that light.

Unfortunately, that's where it falls apart again. There's _so much_ potential
here. My thought process during it:

> Shepard is alone on the Citadel. The Citadel is _massive_. It looks different,
> like it has been transformed into something else, that's cool. What are we
> going to explore through to get where we need to go? What are we going to have
> to struggle through to see this thing done? How hard will Shepard have to push
> to make it through all of the enemies that are surely between here and the
> end, while being so wounded? Will I need to do some tense sneaking?

> Oh... I just... need to walk 30 feet? Through a completely uncontested area? I
> really just got miraculously teleported exactly where I needed to be? Lame.

> Anderson is here? What? Why? I mean I love the guy, but... oh, got it. He's
> just here as a contrivance for The Illusive Man to take a hostage. Whatever,
> just makes me hate TIM even more. It'll be great to kill him in a bossfight,
> he's clearly enhanced like Saren was. This really ties it back to the first
> game in a cool way! Oh, I don't get to fight him at all?

> Wait, there's really no final boss at all? I've already done all the combat in
> the game without realizing it? That's anticlimactic.

Oh, and to top it all off, this section drops probably the most infuriating
reputation check in the series, as a middle finger on the way out to remind you
how shit that system is.

The final visit to the Citadel feels extremely unfinished. It's emblematic of
all of the problems I have with the game. It's a hollow shell of an experience
that had so much promise. It's a contrived facade of a story that feels like it
started with a list of cool moments it wanted to include, and then figured out a
plot to tie them together later.

Then we get to the endings! This is the part I heard about!

If I can be so, so honest, I actually thought they were pretty good. I thought,
if _anything_, these choices of endings actually stuck the landing and improved
my opinion of the game. Were they the best endings ever released? No, but they
were pretty good.

I had heard ahead of time that the endings were basically "pick a color, the
ending cutscene will play out in that color, that's all the choice you get".
While it's true that your choice changes the color of the ending, it's deeper
than that. You're choosing the fate of the galaxy. The available fates are very,
very different. The choices:

- Destroy all synthetics, including your allies, but allow organics to live free
  from the reaper threat.
- Control the reapers and order them to stop, but give up your humanity (and
  it's implied that in giving up your humanity, you'll simply come to the same
  conclusion that the reapers did anyways).
- Merge organics and synthetics, embracing the reapers and their goals, but
  permanently ending the war.
- A secret fourth option, shutting down the Crucible and losing the war, hoping
  the next cycle will do better.

Yes, these options are represented visually by different colors, but I'm not
sure what else they could have done. "A wave of energy across the whole galaxy"
was always the purpose of the Crucible. It's not like they could have
legitimately shown the future of the whole galaxy after such radical changes
were made to it---not in a satisfying way anyways. Much better to leave that up
to the player's imagination.

Importantly, these choices are laid out in great detail, with a ton of lore, and
form a very difficult decision. The most difficult decision in the series. The
true final boss of the "ultimate choices matter game" is a _really_ hard choice.
It's fitting. All the options are consistent with the story, too. Each brings
the story to a close in an interesting way that plays well with the themes laid
out over 3 games of content. I can imagine personalities of Shepards that would
pick any of the options.

I find something about these endings interesting, but I need to get into Deus Ex
spoilers to talk about that. The following spoiler boxes relate to Deus Ex (the
original game from 2000), not Mass Effect:

|| The endings of Deus Ex are: ||

|| Merge with a world-dominating AI, giving up your humanity, but hoping to
control it instead of allowing it to cause untold destruction. It is implied
that in giving up your humanity, you'll come to the same conclusions the AI
already has. ||

|| Break all technology to enter a new dark age---killing many people, but
completely cutting off the current threat and letting people rebuild. ||

|| Embrace the oncoming change to the world, allow it to take over, and become
one of them. ||

|| They're very similar! I don't understand why Mass Effect's endings are so
hated, while these are so loved. It seems like an odd bit of double standards.
Perhaps the reason people hate the Mass Effect endings is not because the
endings themselves are bad fits, but because of how those endings were presented
and the generally unfinished state of the game. There's probably more to think
about here. ||

I have heard that the endings (especially their presentation) were tweaked after
release through some free DLC. Some new scenes were added for context, and most
of the lore I enjoyed was added after the fact. I looked up everything that was
changed. I still think the endings would have been **fine** without all this,
but that stuff definitely did enhance the experience. Then again, I didn't
actually experience the original versions first, so what do I know? Still, it
lends more evidence to my theory that people didn't actually dislike the endings
themselves, because those didn't change, but rather they disliked the
presentation of the endings (because the game was rushed). I've generally seen
the consensus shift in a positive way after those updates. So maybe there's some
truth to my theory.

I was shocked that the endings were some of the best writing in the game (mostly
because of the low quality of the rest of it), after hearing of the infamy of
the endings. Sometimes I just disagree with the greater gaming community
consensus, strongly. It's not the first nor the last time it'll happen.

I'm glad I got to see this for myself, and I'm glad I finally got to experience
these iconic games, even if they weren't all flawless.

### DLC

The DLC was extremely hit-or-miss for me. There were some high highs but also
some very low lows. As seems to be a pattern with these games, I strongly
disagree with the consensus.

In general, the integration of DLC into the game is fairly sloppy. All of them
assume you've played the game at least once before, yet they are inserted into
the game at random points instead of being postgame content. For example, you
can encounter enemies in DLC from the basegame that you've yet to see in the
basegame. When you first encounter these enemies in the basegame, Shepard and
companions have reactions and comments like, "what is that thing?!" and so on.
That feels weird when I've already killed 30 of them in DLC content.

I'm only going to talk about the DLC that adds new quests and stuff, not stuff
like weapon packs (which are the absolute worst kind of DLC, if you want my
opinion on them).

#### From Ashes

This just felt like cut content. It was a very short set of very basic missions
that did nothing special over the base game missions. It introduces a very cool
character, that likely was supposed to be in the base game due to the lore
implications. Indeed, I think many, many of the scenes in the game would have
made significantly more sense if this character had been included from the
start. Sad that the game got rushed to _this_ extent.

#### Leviathan

This is the big one (pun intended). I _really_ liked this one, and I actually
think this could have served as a really interesting end to the game. Very cool
concept, very cool setpieces, and very cool lore implications. I am once again
disappointed that this was not basegame content, because it could have been so
much better integrated, and that would have really helped the basegame out.

Highly recommend playing this one if you've not gotten to it.

#### Omega

I am baffled that the online community hates this one. It was _good_. It's not
as good as Leviathan, but it's good. I really enjoyed it. My only complaint
is that it has virtually zero impact on the rest of the game once complete, but
that's true of the rest of Mass Effect too! (zing)

#### Citadel

Oh. God.

I've heard many times that the Citadel DLC is what "saved the game" for many
fans. I think it may have doomed it for me. It's a fanservice romp filled with
Marvel-level "uh, so THAT just happened!" level quips. No, it's worse, it's the
level of Marvel _parody_ writing. [I can't believe it was Joking time and then
Joker Joked everywhere.](https://youtu.be/ttsL9G4vZCc) Yes, this is obviously
parody. The problem is that it's massive tonal whiplash (and honestly, not even
funny).

It's just kinda dropped on you in the middle of a very serious campaign.
Hey yeah, I know one of your allies just died or whatever and you're having an
emotional time but you're trying to hold your emotions back so that you can
finish this awful, awful war happening all around you---but would you like some
cringe fanservice slop? This should have been a completely separate thing you
load from the main menu. It has no place being integrated into the campaign.

If this DLC was released today, it would be hated. I think it only gets a pass
now because people weren't _completely sick_ of Marvel writing back when it came
out, and there's a lot of nostalgia around it. It didn't age well.

Oh, this section's not over yet? No, there's more.

Surrounding these godawful attempts at humor are _awkward social situations_. We
get a little apartment on the Citadel and we get to invite people over for a
_very awkward house party_. Does the cast of Mass Effect scream "good house
party" to you? No, these characters live in an extremely hard time of peril.
Their personalities throughout the rest of the games show this well. That's not
saying they can't ever party, but it's clear that they weren't written with that
side of them in mind. So, all of that "downtime" personality writing is done
here. It feels very forced, it doesn't feel like it naturally fits pretty much
anyone, and it ends up just being a bunch of drunk idiots doing dumb stuff. I
got more connection to "I've seen _this_ type of person at parties before", like
"every group has the sleepy drunk, the cocky drunk, and the emotional drunk",
than I felt any connection to the actual characters. It's like every character
had a "standard party archetype" assigned to them and that's the level of depth
we got. This section is long, annoying, and I just wanted it to be over.

Then, the actual plot of the DLC is utter slop as well. I honestly don't even
feel like going to the effort of marking it as spoilers, so I just won't write
about it in detail. It isn't worth it. It managed to hit like 4 major writing
pet peeves I have and amounted to essentially nothing. Worthless slop.

I know, I know. The writing was never meant to be taken seriously. It's also
intentionally-bad slop to add to the humor. If you find it all hilarious, I can
see why you'd call it the best DLC ever, like some people have. If that's you,
I'm glad it landed so well for you. It just wan't at all my style of humor, so
all the humor flipped from a strong positive to a strong negative and I
constantly wished for it to just end.

3/10 DLC for me.

## Gameplay

I've delayed this review long enough, so I'm not going to go into detail here.

This was the best of the series when it came to combat. The loadout system was
fun, and I enjoyed being able to equip very few weapons to keep my power
cooldowns as low as possible. I wanted to use Biotics as often as possible, and
it was fun that it allowed me to build in that direction.

There were a few small things I missed though. I liked being able to holster my
weapons. Seems like a small thing, sure, but I noticed it constantly. I don't
like the picture of Shepard running around, guns out at all times. It's not
practical and it makes no sense. It took me out of the game a bit.

I think the "Reaper Threat" in the galaxy when you're flying around exploring
different systems/planets was just bad. It felt like maybe there was a deeper,
more meaningful system in place but it got neutered before release. We spend the
series seeing the Reapers be a massive threat, with a single one being a _big
fucking problem_ for entire fleets. They dominate whole systems with their mere
presence. Our only saving grace is that they're kinda slowly moving through the
galaxy.

Then, in space, all this means is that when you scan, they might chase you. In
theory, this could be cool. You might have to be more strategic and careful with
how you approach exploration. You might have to abandon areas when you
accidentally draw too much attention to them, because the Reapers dominate their
claimed areas.

Instead, you just get kinda chased and then they leave you alone if you avoid
them for 5 seconds. This doesn't make sense to me. They're _Reapers_. They're
supposed to be _Reaping_. If they're in a system, they should be destroying all
life there in a grand, grim harvest. If they're in a system, it would take a
similar level of effort to save that system as it would be to save Earth, and
the whole game deals with saving Earth. We can't put that level of effort into
every system, we should consider those systems lost. Nope. You can just leave
and come back and everything's fine. No more reapers. They weren't chasing
_life_, they were chasing _you_.

None of this makes sense. It manages to make the Reapers feel weak in a game all
about them being strong, completely ignores their purpose and motivations, and
amounts to nothing more than a minor nuisance. The game would be better with it
entirely removed. It has zero positive effect on the game.

On the positive side, the gameplay moment that sticks out most to me: Facing
down a Reaper with an orbital strike laser linked up to an entire fleet.
Fucking. Awesome. No notes. In fact, that whole section of the game was the best
part. The best writing. The best setpieces. The best character moments. I think
they should have split this game in half, with this as and ending to the third
game. That would have given the finale more time to cook.

## Final Thoughts

**Rating: 6/10**  
_Playtime: 27 hours_

I'm glad to have finally finished this. There are some moments I'll always
remember, and I overall enjoyed my time. A 6/10 is still a positive rating from
me, it's just a flawed game even if it has redeeming elements. Mass Effect 2 is
still the peak of the series.
