---
title: Lorelei and the Laser Eyes
tagline: Overcooked Masterpiece
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

I _really_ wanted to love this one.

I'm a huge fan of one of Simogo's other games, Sayonara Wild Hearts. It's
gorgeous, but dripping with style and good art direction instead of trying to
chase realism or bleeding edge technology. It's got simple, yet clever gameplay
that managed to pleasantly surprise me around every corner. It's got an abstract
story that favors showing you things rather than telling them to you. Just a
really cool and unique game that twists a few genres together. I replay it like,
once every year or so. It's a soul-healing game.

- So I heard that they released a new game.
- I heard it's extremely well received.
- It's a long puzzle game in which previous puzzles inform later puzzles.
- It's got an equal-but-opposite style from Sayonara Wild Hearts, fusing noir with
  classic horror games.

Of course I bought it immediately and started that night.

What I found was... frustrating. It took me several attempts to finally get into
this game.

It gets my #1 worst control scheme of the year award. Strong contender for worst
of the decade. Decent possibility for worst all time. It was endlessly getting
in my way. _Everything_ is handled with directional controls and a single
button. That doesn't sound too bad on the surface, but it's implemented in the
worst way possible. This is an extremely menu-heavy game. There is no "back"
button on any control scheme. You have to navigate in the menu to the button
that closes the menu. Oh, you scrolled to the bottom for something, hitting the
down button 37 times to get there? Time to hit the up button 38 times to be able
to leave the menu! Want to access a map? First open the generic menu, then open
notes, then maps, then find the floor you are on. Want to open your menu while
standing in front of something interactable? Turn around first, so the game
doesn't think you want to interact. Accidentally opened a puzzle and want to
leave? You have to submit a fake answer to leave. Want to move a dial on a
combination lock down? Sorry, the up and down buttons change dials, and only the
interact button moves them up, so you have to cycle through all possibilities to
get back to the start. So. Many. Button. Presses. To. Accomplish. The. Simplest.
Tasks. Additionally, _every_ button that isn't a direction is mapped to that
single control button. Accidentally nudged a key by mistake? You opened the
menu. Great. Fantastic.

Additionally, a lot of the puzzle designs were either extremely player hostile
or just poor quality filler. By hostile, I mean stuff like pieces of information
being literally all the way across the map from the puzzles requiring them. This
means there's a _ton_ of unnecessary walking around (with very poor controls, to
boot). It's also stuff like some puzzles requiring a calculator, and the game
including a calculator to help, but making you go through an 8 menu process and
watching several animations every time you needed to access it. Really hard to
look back and forth with that. By poor quality filler, I'm talking about puzzles
are stuff like || these numbers keep appearing in other puzzles, just try
inputting those numbers into all the locks until some of them work || (I looked
this up and it is the intended solution) or puzzles that are just too many
layers deep. If I need 8 smaller puzzle solutions to solve a larger puzzle, it's
very frustrating to find that each of those puzzles actually contains 4 puzzles
in a chain. Speaking of, the puzzles are also very "escape room" style, where
you need to solve one puzzle to get a clue to solve another puzzle.
Unfortunately, the game _never_ gives you any indication that it's possible for
you to solve each puzzle. You're just left to flounder and guess. This left me
with a lot of time not knowing where to go, navigating at a glacial pace and
getting more frustrated with every step.

There are so many weird little hostile things in this game. You can drink
coffee, temporarily increasing your movement speed. However, to do so you have
to take off your coat, otherwise you'll overheat. You can only leave your coat
at a few coat hangers in the game. If the coffee runs out and you don't have
your coat, you'll start to get cold instead. So you have to stay near that coat.
You will also need to visit the single bathroom, very out of the way, after
drinking the coffee. You also are forced to watch an animation of brewing and
drinking coffee each time, which you can't skip. The length of that animation
alone is enough that simply walking to your destination without coffee would
have been faster. Then you get all the other downsides on top. There is
literally no point in drinking the coffee. I wondered a few times if it may be
part of a puzzle. || nope, lol ||

That's not all! This is spoilers: || At some point, you start encountering
randomly wandering enemies that chase you from room to room. You are told when
they are introduced that they are dangerous, they'll kill you. Fortunately,
they're slow. You can just run away, even without coffee. What the game
_doesn't_ tell you is that you _need to get caught by them 9 times to be able to
progress past that point_. HUH?! I had to sit with the game open, semi-afk, for
two full hours waiting for these guys to spawn and catch me, because I had spent
the rest of the game avoiding them. Great experience. ||

Fortunately, the rest was _really_ good. I can see why people really love the
game. It's got all those elements from Sayonara Wild Hearts that I love, but in
a whole new style. There are some _absolute banger_ puzzles in there. The art is
always fantastic. The concept for the story is really cool, and I love the way
in which it was told. I was delighted by some of the ways the gameplay was
changed. It was very satisfying to see it all come together.

It feels like they had a 10/10 game on their hands, and somebody with a lot of
influence said, "No, the player must suffer more. I said more. More. Also triple
the game's length without adding anything of value. Perfect."

I've spoken before about how I actually think that "making the player suffer"
can sometimes really work for a game. If there's a particular emotion that the
game is trying to evoke, especially horror, but also sometimes frustration or
disorientation, expressing that through the gameplay can be really interesting!
It's just got to serve the story to be good. I didn't feel that with Lorelei.
The story and tone were very different than the negative feelings the game gave
me. It's like these negative gameplay experiences were pulled out of another
game and put into this one without understanding why they worked in the other
game. In particular, this game borrows a lot from classic horror games, but it
is in no way a horror game, and it would have been a better game by not
attempting to copy them.

So what we've got here is a masterpiece---just one that unfortunately got
overcooked to the point of being burnt. The developers failed to realize that
sometimes less is more, and kept including things on top of what would have been
a masterpiece, spoiling it.

Still, there's a ton to love. Even with all the sins I outline above, I still
feel like this deserves an 8/10. That's a testament to just how much I loved the
good parts. It's really fantastic. I hope Simogo learns from that. I look
forward to their next banger.
