---
title: Hellblade 2 - Tragic Masterpiece
brief:
tagline: The Hardest Battles are Fought in the Mind
series:
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

This is a **beautiful work of art**. I don't think my words will do it justice,
but I'll put my thoughts out there anyways because _I need to_. This is a game
I'll be replaying for years. I'll be shocked if this isn't my GotY 2024.

Please forgive me. I use far too many synonyms for "amazing" in this review. **I
can't help it**. Every facet of this game is simply _too good to do otherwise_.

I'll begin with a bit of a rambling rant that isn't directly related to the
game, but rather _the state of the industry and the polarizing nature of
social-media discourse_. If you'd like, [you can skip it](#visuals). You can
also skip all the way down to the [conclusion](#conclusion) if you prefer.

# Ranting About External Stuff

I call this a **tragic masterpiece**---not because it's too dark and never has
any hope or anything like that (though it absolutely is on the darker, more
tragic side), but because of _how this game was (and is) being treated_.
Microsoft did barely any marketing, then threw it on Gamepass day 1. Gamers^TM^
are bored because you can't grind for gear or go on sidequests. People look no
further than the 8-hour playtime and dismiss it as overpriced, unfinished trash.

_Hellblade deserved better_.

To be clear: if you didn't like this game, or it doesn't look like your kind of
game, or whatever, **that's fine**. I don't think this game will be for
everyone. I don't think it ever tried to be (and I'm personally glad for that).
I completely understand how niche this game is, so I don't blame anyone for not
being into it. **Unfortunately**, such level-headed responses as _"it wasn't for
me"_ are not the prevailing discourse right now. Instead, praise and valid
criticisms alike are all drowned in shallow, joke responses like _"they forgot
to include gameplay ðŸ’€"_. **That saddens me**.

It's a shame that this game released during a time when Microsoft was really
hurting for good exclusives. Many people saw how gorgeous this game was and
automatically assumed it was Microsoft's attempt at a God of War type game. They
thought it _would_ be one of those general-appeal blockbusters. It's not. That
misplaced expectation and disappointment fueled the negativity even more.

...but I'll say it with my whole chest: **This game is a _masterpiece_**.

It's got the vision and focus of an indie darling, but the budget of a
first-party AAA exclusive. The result is stunning and captivating. That
combination makes this game an incredibly rare unicorn---a _miracle_.

The fact that it is such a miracle is **tragic**. This is, absolutely, _a very
niche game_. It also cost a hell of a lot to make, yet was put on Gamepass right
away. I doubt Microsoft will see this as anything but a _massive commercial
failure_. It's rare for so much budget to be allocated for something so niche.
With how Microsoft has been acting lately---_I'm worried about Ninja Theory_, and
_I'm worried the industry will never allow a game like this again_.

This game gave me a glimpse of what games could be like if they weren't held
back by the awful structure of the industry. It's certainly not the only game to
have done this, but it's very rare that a game both does that _and_ feels
tailor-made to my taste.

I'm very thankful.

# Visuals

_This game is gorgeous_. This seems like the first Unreal Engine 5 game to
actually take advantage of everything the engine has to offer. It's the first
one I've personally seen, at least.

I could still tell it was Unreal Engine. It just had that **feel** to it. The
way asset streaming looks while in-process, some of the animation transitions,
and little details like that all felt very _Unreal Engine_. Though, beyond that
it felt like a huge leap forward for Unreal Engine tech. At all times, it looked
as-good-as or better-than **stellar** games like Alan Wake 2 or Cyberpunk 2077.

This game was very focused on providing a cinematic experience, right down to
letterboxing to a 21:9 widescreen ratio. I think that was a great decision. It
shows right away what the game is going for. You're not being offered a wide FoV
optimized for **gameplay**. You're being offered an _interactive cinematic
experience_.

That sounds **extremely** pretentious, but I fully believe _it deserves it_.

It never once dropped that cinematic feel. As I wandered through the game, I
found myself naturally lining the camera for excellent shots **effortlessly**.
An extreme level of attention to detail was put into environment design to
ensure that every corner, every angle, and every subject I looked at had an
easily achievable shot with satisfying composition. I never felt like I was
fighting with the camera to get a good angle, but I also never felt like it took
away my control. It would perform subtle tricks like getting closer or further
from Senua when I just happened to look at certain things, to help line
everything up. This meant that no matter what I was doing, I was effortlessly
looking at a **gorgeous** shot. This really helped me _immerse myself into the
game_.

This also led to really great cutscene transitions. Everything in this game is
rendered directly in the engine. Upon entering a cutscene, nothing would change
except that control was subtly taken away from me for the duration. More
impressively, I never noticed dramatic camera, character model, or animation
shifts while entering a cutscene. It all just worked seamlessly. I honestly
couldn't tell if the game shifted cutscenes so that they fit the camera angle I
walked into them with, or if the game had subtly guided my camera placement
using the above tricks such that I naturally put the camera close to the right
spot while approaching cutscene triggers. _I'm not sure which one is more
impressive_. So seamless I almost think the name "cutscene" may no longer apply.
I loved it.

Those cutscenes were full of _the most expressive faces I've ever seen in a
game_. Even in normal gameplay, examining the faces of anyone on screen revealed
a wealth of detail, but the cutscenes were something else. You could see jaws
tense, eyelids twitch, nostrils flare slightly, and a million micro-expressions.
It was extremely impressive. The emotional aspect of the story was **really
enhanced** by this. Emotions and social cues were a huge part of the game's
story, so this attention to detail paid off massively. I could feel my heart
rate elevating in an empathic reaction to the expressions on-screen.

I was also impressed to see that my blows in combat were actually leaving marks.
I could see deep gashes left behind by my blade, bits of armor being chipped
away, and more. Those details could easily get lost in the hectic, intense
combat scenes, but they were included anyways. They seemed dynamic, not
pre-programmed. Like, if I approached an enemy from their left flank and swung,
barely clipping their thigh, that _exact spot_ is where a new cut would appear.
It would align with the angle of my swing and the length I cut as well. Really
impressive.

The visuals got really surreal and abstract sometimes, and the game pulled it
off very well. There were some extremely cool, mind-bending scenes. Some scenes
were just poetic pieces of art that evoked a ton of meaning in the story. Some
scenes were terrifying in a primal way. Some scenes were beautiful and peaceful.
Some scenes put a big dumb grin on my face with how _perfect_ they were. The
game played with blending reality and fiction constantly, and it was _very well
backed by the visuals_.

I was constantly enthralled by how this game looked, and the level of detail
added a lot to the experience rather than just being a marketing thing. It
wasn't "this game is good _and_ it looks good too!", it truly used technology to
elevate its storytelling to a new level. **One I've never seen before**. If I
went to a movie theater for a modern animated film, I would not be disappointed
to see this level of fidelity. I was pleasantly surprised that my 3070 managed
to stay above 60fps for the vast majority, even with the settings pretty high.
Game graphics have a _bright_ future, if this is anything to judge by.

# Audio

The first game originally caught my attention due to it's unique audio design.
This game improves on it in every way. It may be not just the best audio design
I've heard in any game, but _the best audio design I've heard in any piece of
media_.

I cranked this game **loud** while I played it. This is actually something I
keep track of, because I'm a nerd, so I've got some numbers. For my audio setup,
I normalize game volumes and then apply a global audio fader to it so that I can
rapidly adjust things as needed without having to dig into individual game
settings. For this game, I jumped from my usual of around -20dB on the fader to
about -5dB---roughly a 3x boost. That's the volume I prefer for music when I
want to drown everything else out. Yes, this game's audio design was so good
that _I wanted to drown in it_. I wanted to soak in every delicious detail and
let it _sweep me away_. I was fully immersed---more than any other game, movie,
or other form of media has made me.

Environmental sounds were **incredible**. This is mostly due to how well this
game handles spatial audio. Everything just sounded **right**. Walking near
rushing water sounded like I was walking near rushing water. I could hear it
right next to me. I could hear my footsteps crunch into gravel beneath me. I
could hear the foliage gently rustle nearby. I know it sounds lame, _"I could
hear it"_. Yeah, of course, games have been producing good environmental sounds
for many years now. I honestly can't put my finger on what the trick is, but
there's some secret sauce here. I think the closest comparison is when I
upgraded my monitor and started playing games at a higher resolution, but for
audio. It was an _extremely immersive experience_, and I think that was due to
some nice, intentional design.

Many games have their audio balanced to be **readable**, but this one instead
went for **immersion** at all costs. Audio cues are a pretty frequent and
important element of game design. They can communicate information in a way that
is difficult to represent with visuals, enhance visual cues in case the visuals
are too busy, and so on. This game... doesn't really have any of that. The
gameplay is simple enough that such cues aren't really necessary. I think this
choice served the game really well.

The audio also had some great dynamic balancing and effects. When Senua would
get lost in thought, the whole world would fade out a bit. When she focused, it
would get a bit muted, crunchy, and distant. When you discover a piece of hidden
lore, the backdrop would fade out kinda to the sides in the 3D audio, which was
a weirdly _intimate_ feeling.

You know **those** sci-fi sounds? The crunchy, ripple sounds that evoke some
alien material being turned inside-out? Somewhere between bubbles and plastic
popping, but deep and dark? The ones that usually accompany something in reality
_warping in a way it shouldn't_? I unfortunately can't find a good example based
on these search terms, but hopefully that description reminds you of what I'm
talking about. This game has _that_ kind of sound design. I usually associate
those sounds with sci-fi, but they fit _so incredibly well_ in this
surreal yet grounded, gritty, dark fantasy.

Music was excellent. It ranged from serene, haunting backdrops to visceral,
heart-pounding expressions of **violence**. It featured a lot of wordless vocal
work. Long, drawn out, primal releases of emotion. Chants. Shouts. Screams.
Every song set the tone _perfectly_, an exact fit to enhance every other part of
the game. There were a ton of amazing moments where the music synced up with the
gameplay, which moved me in ways I've never been moved before. It was
**inspiring**. Just thinking about those scenes have given me goosebumps while I
write this. Extremely, supremely powerful art.

[This](https://youtu.be/HvYUcQvpupI?si=h63dCgKdr2to9Cka&t=1699) (28:19 - 43:16)
is my favorite example. Especially in context.

The acting for every character was impeccable. Everyone did an _amazing_ job.
Every line was believable. The delivery matched the expressions and movements of
the characters perfectly. Each actor really lent a lot of personality to their
character. I'm _especially_ impressed with the actress for Senua,
[Melina Juergens](https://x.com/juergensmelina). Every single line she delivered
landed with such impact. Her screams, battle cries, and other non-verbal sounds
were all made with 300% effort. Even the way she breathed managed to convey
emotion. She's a true master of her craft, and clearly has an incredible amount
of passion for her art. I'm **shocked** that this has been her only role.

Believe it or not, _I haven't even gotten to the best part_.

## The Voices - The Furies

This is the most **iconic** part of Hellblade, and what drew me to it
originally.

Senua has psychosis. Ninja Theory did a ton of research into this, including
working with leading neuroscientists on the topic, and people who have
psychosis. They used the personal experiences of these people and the findings
of expert researchers to ensure that their portrayal of psychosis was as
accurate as possible and to avoid propagating tropes.

Senua's hallucinations and loss of touch with reality are manifestations of this
(more on that later). The most striking elements of this are the voices---The
Furies, as they are eventually called in the first game---that Senua hears _at
all times_.

They serve as a sort of inner monologue for Senua, but twisted. We never
actually hear _Senua's_ voice among them. They are all outsiders. They torment
Senua, tearing her down viciously for not being good enough, _she'll never be
good enough_. They encourage and comfort her, _you're faster, you can do this_.
They give voice to her fears, _you'll never see them again_. They comment on the
situation, _what was that, a silhouette?_ They shout with rage, _make him
suffer---he **deserves** to suffer_. They scream primal instincts: **RUN**. They
are jumbled and conflicted. They talk over each other. They are dozens of
personality aspects scrambling over each other. They are an _excellent picture
of mental torment and conflict_.

Among them are the voices of the people who left an impact in Senua's life.
Dillion, her late lover represents wisdom and determination. Her father
represents dark urges and the fear of being a monster. Her mother represents
mindfulness and acceptance. At some points later in the game ||mysterious
"hidden folk" represent intuition and empathy, as she struggles to understand
the true feelings of others.||

As mentioned above, Senua's voice is never internal. She always speaks out loud,
sometimes responding to the other voices. Though, she makes a point not to do
this when others are in earshot. This is another interesting blend of reality
and fiction. It makes Senua's own voice seem more external than her internal
voices.

I said earlier that there are few/no audio cues, but that isn't entirely
correct. The voices act as a set of audio cues of sorts. Subtle is the wrong
word, as the voices are very obvious, but they cue things in an immersive way.
They'll tell you, _focus, Senua, focus_, indicating that you may want to hit R2
to activate the focus mechanic. _He's too strong, you can't handle this_ they'll
say as you fight an enemy that uses a lot of unblockable attacks, but also
_you're faster, you can do this_. They'll talk about the puzzles you're working
on too, or chime in with stuff like _look at that, above you!_ I normally
dislike when it feels like a game is holding my hand too much, as I prefer to
figure things out myself, and such hints rob me of that experience. This worked
well for me though. I think it's because what the voices were saying was never
really _new_ information. I'd already come to those conclusions, since the game
is pretty simple and readable. Additionally, the voices would often give
conflicting info. I just saw them as annoying backseaters, placed there to plant
doubt and be insufferable even when correct, which seems accurate to Senua's
experience.

The voices are recorded with binaural audio. This makes it feel like the voices
are right behind you; whispering into your left ear; walking back and forth in
front of you; in the back corner of the room; shouting down from above you;
somewhere present, with you, right now. Split opinions will be _whispered into
opposite ears simultaneously_. They will be scattered around the room behind
you, making it feel like you have an audience chiming in on everything you do.
It's a really cool effect, and it elevates these voices above the other sounds
in the game. No matter what is happening, the voices sound more internal, more
intimate, and always clear. The way the voices shift around in space is
distracting in an intentional way. They **force** you to pay attention to them.
It's a really cool way to represent internal, intrusive thoughts.

The voices really make this game unique. They cleverly represent real mental
health struggles in an extremely emotionally impactful way.

# Design

There's no UI to be seen in this game. I like this choice a lot. Right at the
start of the game, you are presented with the complete control scheme, which is
pretty simple and easy to remember. Left and right sticks are movement and
camera, as you'd expect. You've got light and heavy attack buttons, a dodge
button, and an interact button for the face buttons---all in familiar places. L1
is sprint. R1 is block. Either trigger is focus. Not a lot to remember, and it's
all pretty standard action-game stuff. That's all the interface the game had
(unless you hit pause, I guess). Everything else was shown in _some kind of
immersive way_, as immersive and cinematic are the two biggest design goals of
this game, it seems.

The most common one that other games have been doing for a long time was health.
You don't have a health bar, so how do you represent how close the player is to
failing a combat section? **Make the screen red and dirty**. Classic. I really
like how they did it in this game though. It was tasteful, intuitive, and didn't
seem out of place. They also took it a little bit further. Whenever Senua would
get hit, she'd react in some visceral way. She doesn't just stagger back a bit
and get back into it. _She would get knocked to the dirt, get grappled, or be
left with a ringing in her head_. She'd have to fight to get back on her feat
and get back into the action. At first, she'd easily roll back up, break free,
or shake it off. As she takes more and more hits, she'd be knocked down in more
and more brutal ways, taking ever longer to rise back to her feet. Eventually,
on the very brink of death, the camera zooms in on her face while she struggles
to keep her body from shutting down, with a looming enemy approaching to
**finish it**. You the player would have to **mash buttons** to get her back on
her feet before death arrives. Success gives you another chance. You really
_feel_ that brush with death. It's extremely effective.

Similarly, enemies don't have a health bar anywhere. As I mentioned earlier,
enemies respond believably when struck. Your blows leave actual marks, armor
gets worn down, and so on. This is your main indication of how much damage
you've dealt.

This is a game with a sprint button, but I found I rarely wanted to use it. Even
in the longer walking sections. I never felt like I wanted to _just get through_
any section of the game. I wanted to soak it all in. It felt like Senua would
_walk_ here, there would be no in-fiction reason for her to sprint here, **so I
would walk**. I was so immersed that the idea to sprint didn't cross my mind.
There were, of course, plenty of places where a sprint felt more reasonable,
like when danger was present or something was urgent. Of course I used it in
those circumstances. It just felt really nice to have sprint as something that
felt more like a _story tool_ than a way to skip through what would be
**boring** walks in other games. There were a few spots where sprint was used
even more creatively, as almost more of a **determination** button. The game
would slow the walk pace to barely perceptible movement, while the sprint would
be normal walking speed. It was like the game was asking me, _are you **really**
sure? Do you **really want to see what's over there?**_

Interactable things in the world blend in seamlessly, but they're also
surrounded by subtle indicators. For example, many games get criticism for the
"yellow paint infection" telling the player where they can and can not go. I've
never really had a problem with this (though it does sometimes get a bit
excessive). However, Hellblade just handles it **better**. It does a similar
thing with coloration and lighting. Instead of a bright yellow color that
clashes with the environment, it uses more _subtle_, but still
attention-grabbing colors. If you need to interact with a particular object, it
will be prominently displayed and often be bathed in the environment's light.
Not like video-gamey light from out of nowhere. Stuff like a crack in the cave
you're in letting some light in directly onto that item. Even when it doesn't
play light tricks, it always manages to make things obvious without anything
seeming out of place. Often, it makes the setup feel _even more epic_. If
something should use the **focus** mechanic, it will often cause a
lense-flare-like, mirrored, or distorted magical effect. And of course, your
voices are always there as backseat gamers. _Focus, Senua, you need to
**Focus**_.

Speaking of Focus, it comes up as consumable resource in combat. I'll talk about
that more later, but the part to talk about here is how that resource is
displayed to you without a UI. Senua carries around a small mirror, significant
from the first game. Your level of focus is displayed as _glowing runes on that
mirror_. The mirror is hitched to her back right hip. The camera always hovers
over her right shoulder. So, the mirror is always in-sight when you need it.
Additionally, because the runes glow, they can be clearly read no matter how
hectic, dark, or obscured the gameplay gets. It's a simple thing, but I really
like it.

There is a lot of collectible lore in this game, and I think the way it is
hidden is _genius_. Most of it is gated behind noticing a pattern in the world
and focusing on it. For example, there are faces hidden in the rough stone parts
of the environments. If you focus on them from the right angle, it becomes clear
that they were optical illusions and there is an alternative path right through
the face. It's a bit like
[Superliminal](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1049410/Superliminal/) but
much less complicated. That effect on its own is very cool, but that's not the
genius part. The genius part is that it got me to **look for faces absolutely
everywhere**. It made me look at the world in a different way, forced me to be a
bit paranoid, and to really pay attention. So simple. So effective. **Genius**.
Also the lore behind these things was really cool. **Guess what?** _The genius
doesn't stop there._ Some major themes of the game include seeing things from a
new perspective, searching for hidden meaning, and empathizing with the humanity
of monsters. This mechanic _emphasizes all 3 of those_. Gah. I could gush about
this forever.

# Gameplay

This is, admittedly, the weakest part of this game. Though, I don't think it
sought to create the new best gameplay experience. In fact, it sacrifices a lot
of gameplay conventions in order to serve the immersive/cinematic goals better.
It might seem strange to heap so much praise onto a _game_ that doesn't have
excellent **gameplay**, but I assure you I am fully serious with my admiration
for this game.

That said, I _did_ find the gameplay that is there to be sufficiently
satisfying. It served its purpose well: causing my own button presses to hit
emotional triggers for me as much as they hit gameplay triggers on the screen.
It might be a hot take, but I actually think they should have taken it a _little
further_. They could have trimmed back even more gameplay, and gotten a better
product. The weakest parts of the gameplay are where they **weren't quite bold
enough to cut back on the gameplay enough**, and the pacing suffered. I'll
explain that below.

## Combat

I'll start with combat, as the most exciting part. It's pretty standard, if
minimal, action-adventure stuff. You've got light attack and heavy attack,
dodge, block, sprint, and focus. The game doesn't tell you, but if you perfectly
time a block, you'll execute a _parry_ and automatically hit the enemy with a
high-damage counterattack. This will **kill** any weak enemy, and **severely
wound** any boss. Heavy attacks force enemies out of blocking. Enemy attacks
have tells when they are unblockable. This is generally represented by a red
glint on the weapon before the strike. Once again, the game makes this obvious
without feeling out of place. The glint looks like the blade just happened to
reflect a fire or something nearby, not like an obvious game mechanic, but it's
still hard to miss.

Combat is always between you and one other enemy at a time. _It's a system of
duels_. Sometimes there will be other enemies waiting in the background.
Sometimes you'll have allies fighting those enemies to keep them away from you.
It always manages to make this feel believable though. You don't always fight
_just one_ enemy until they die, and repeat. Sometimes, that enemy will flee
while another takes advantage of the opening you left by striking. It's a really
cool, cinematic system that made every fight feel **extremely intense**.

The animations are _awesome_. Every blow feels heavy, no matter who landed it.
There are countless custom animations for a mind-blowing number of
circumstances. You parried this one enemy's leftward swing #3 as part of his
rush combo, and he happened to be standing on a beach, with your allies nearby?
**There's a custom parry animation and execution attack for this specific
circumstance**. That's how it felt anyways. I was constantly impressed with the
number of custom animations. They made the fights feel even more grounded, and
really sold the stakes and brutality of the fights. It felt more like the fight
choreography of movies than the combat animations of a videogame. _Intense
stuff_.

Unfortunately, I think they relied on combat just a tad too much. Some fights
had just one or two too many enemies, and they dragged on a little bit.
Sometimes it felt like a combat encounter was added where it didn't need to be.
Once again, **too much videogame in the videogame**.

## Puzzles

The other big gameplay element was a series of puzzles. They generally revolved
around shifting your perspective of the world in a number of different ways,
and/or playing with light and shadow. It was cool that the themes fit so well,
but these often dragged on just a little bit. Sometimes I'd finish a puzzle,
only to find another nearly identical puzzle behind it. It really felt like the
themes could have been sold without padding for time or beating a dead horse
like that. **Too much videogame etc.**

There were a few standout puzzles though. I really liked them, and they added a
lot to the game, though I won't detail them here for spoiler reasons. They
weren't particularly difficult, they just showed a natural conclusion that had
powerful story implications without using words. Real _ohhhh I **get** it now!_
moments where everything clicks, and either put a big smile on my face or made
me cry. It's possible that these wouldn't have been such natural conclusions
without the other puzzles to back them up. If that's the case, I forgive the
extra puzzles mentioned above.

# Story

_The story of this game is something special._

I'm going to try and remain spoiler-free here. I'll mark stuff in ||spoilers||
as necessary. That said, if I've already convinced you to play this, I recommend
that you stop reading this section, skip down to [the conclusion](#conclusion)
and just experience the story for yourself. I really enjoyed discovering the
themes of the game for myself, so I'd consider pretty much any of this section
to be light spoilers. I'm certain that my words here won't even come _close_ to
doing this game justice anyways. What I have to offer is of _low value_ in
comparison to you just going and playing the game. **It's on Gamepass! Go do
it!**

If you're still reading this section, I'll assume you need some more convincing
before playing. **I'll do my best**! Alternatively, you're back after finishing the
game---in which case _I'd love to hear how your thoughts compare to mine_!

This story isn't a sweeping drama. It isn't full of betrayals or big plot
twists. It doesn't have an intricate structure or even a long one. What is has
is _focus_ and _detail_. This story knows what it wants, and it gets everything
else out of the way. At the same time, it digs deep on the emotional details of
each scene. It also has some really interesting thoughts on _perspective_. I'll
get to each below.

## Focus

The focus is on **redemption**, **forgiveness**, and **the overlap between
humanity and monsters**. _There's always a choice, a better way_. Throughout the
story, Senua witnesses this a number of times. It starts with the ||cruel
slaver||, who is shown a new path of hope. It continues with the ||giants||,
who's fury is quenched by rediscovering their humanity. It concludes with
||Senua||, who's story begins and ends with violent revenge---yet is still given
a chance to reach towards the light. By the end, Senua has had this point
hammered into her multiple times. Though she struggles with a darkness
within---self-doubt, self-blame, and anger---she is _never beyond redemption_.
All of the monsters she faces are metaphors for her own personal demons, and by
conquering them, she learns to accept herself.

> The rest of this **Focus** section will be significantly more spoilery

The first story of redemption is ||Thorgestr, the cruel slaver. He starts the
game as a slaver---_your_ slaver. He is cruel and uncaring. He brings slaves
from afar with the intention to use them as human sacrifices. He has done this
regularly, countless times. He is the first boss in the game and the first step
in Senua's path of revenge. As Senua forces him to lead her to his homeland, he
warns her that it is full of nothing but death and suffering. It is later
revealed that he is a man who hates himself for what he does. He takes actions
that he thinks are necessary, according to the oppressive forces above him, but
he hates it. He is bitter, resigned to his fate, thinking the world is cruel and
no better way exists. Senua shows him that authority can be challenged, and
Thorgestr immediately flips his worldview. He becomes obsessed with the idea of
changing the world for the better, and beginning to atone for the wrong he has
done. He becomes an ally to Senua, backing her rebellion against the world.
However, he still clings to the hierarchy. He seeks to convince his father, a
tyrant, to change his ways. Finally, he gives up his attachment to his father's
authority, and with it, gives up his life. The man who once would sacrifice the
world to save himself, sacrificed himself to save the world.||

The second redemption story, but first chronologically, is ||the giant Illtauga.
Illtauga is introduced to us as a monster. She is rage, violence, and
destruction. We are told she is unbeatable, an oppressive force of nature and a
harsh fact of the world. Senua sees things differently, and she sees more. Senua
seeks the truth, not accepting that Illtauga is truly invincible. Something
interesting happens: Senua's search for Illtauga's truth seems more like a
journey through Senua's own trauma. At the end, we learn that Illtauga's
backstory is extremely similar to Senua's own. Both characters' villages were
burned down. Both feel pain, regret, and anger. Both blame themselves for the
death and suffering around them. This pain drove Illtauga to become a monster.
Her self-blame turned her into a being of hellfire and destruction just like the
volcano that took everything from her. Senua realizes that she could have just
as easily become a monster. Maybe she's already on that path---seeking revenge.
Senua feels empathy for Illtauga. She confronts the giant, taking refuge from
the magma of rage in the paths of Illtauga's pain and regret that only Senua
sees. Senua gets to the heart of Illtauga's rage, and dismantles the chains of
rage that bind her one by one. Finally, Senua forgives Ingunn, the human who
became Illtauga, and gives her the remains of the giant's child. Ingunn finds
peace, much like Senua did in the first game, and the monster is no more.||

The next one has a lot of parallels to the previous. ||SjÃ¡varrisi is the next
giant to deal with. Originally a man named Seageirr, he is full of pain from the
hate he receives from others. Though his intentions were good, he is blamed by
others for all the hardships around them. This pain builds and builds until he
is unable to take it, and becomes a giant. Now he truly is the oppressive force
that everyone around him believes him to be. Once again, there are parallels
with Senua. Her psychosis was considered by her father and much of her village
to be a curse and a mark of irredeemable sin. Senua knows very well the pain of
being attacked for who you are, and for being unfairly blamed. She weathers the
tide of Seageirr's depression as it rises and falls---represented by an
inescapable torrent of water that drags one under. Senua manages, by clinging to
the rocks around her. I think these rocks represent the allies she has
accumulated during her journey. This time, all it takes to cure the monster is
to reach out her hand, and give Seageirr a human touch. She tells him that she
understands him. She knows him. She accepts him. The monster is no more.||

The final confrontation flips the script. ||The last giant is Aleifr,
Thorgestr's father. Aleifr sought power, and he liked when people relied on him.
When the hardships faded due to his leadership, people no longer needed him. So,
he secretly created hardship for his people while offering to protect them from
it. Aleifr "created" the giants. They were a fabrication all along. He used this
fear to keep his people dependent on him. The cure he sold was human sacrifice.
That very ritual is what led to the death of Senua's people in the first game.
When the fight begins, it appears that Aleifr has the power of the giants behind
him. It seems impossible to win. No matter how many wounds he takes, he never
ceases. However, Senua comes to understand that he rules through fear, not due
to any real threat. The fight gets easier and easier, until Aleifr appears
bumbling and helpless. In this way, Senua conquers another of her personal
demons: fear. It turns out, the true monster was a human all along.||

The final, overarching redemption story is Senua's own. ||She starts the tale
seeking revenge for the destruction of her village, her family, her lover, and
everyone she knew. She ends the tale with the man who did it in her mercy.
Throughout the story, Senua dealt with her demons one by one, by accepting them.
She saw countless times how all of the elements of her own story could end in
redemption, in peace. So now, at the end of the tale, she is given a choice:
finally take revenge and kill the man responsible, proving herself more powerful
than he was and leading his people through that perception of power---or choose
a better way. Her fathers words rang through her head throughout the game,
telling her she was full of sin, and that the corruption would overwhelm her
soon enough. Senua deals with her final demon. She resolves to prove, every day,
that she is not what her father says. She refuses the corruption, choosing life
and peace, even though it's much, much harder.||

## Detail

This might be a silly way to describe it, but the voices of this game almost act
like a constant _director's commentary_. Except, they are meant to **integrate
into** the story instead of layering on top of it. Additionally, they are not a
reliable source of truth. Instead, they serve as a guide for vibes. They are
there to _insert thoughts into your head_ just as much as they are there to
represent Senua's own thoughts. Every social interaction; Every challenge; Every
symbol; Every moment left alone in thought; Every twinge of self doubt; Every
fear; Every regret: all are given more detail due to the voices. It's **really**
interesting storytelling that adds a lot of depth.

Senua herself is an unreliable narrator. We are looking through unreliable eyes
the entire time. Everything magical or fantastical that Senua sees? It's her own
hallucination. Even some of the other characters may be hallucinations. That's
why so many of the challenges Senua faces mirror her own internal struggles.
She's experiencing her _internal struggles_ as _external_, **because that's how
her mind works**. The authors were able to turn the narrative metaphors into
physical things in such a beautiful, cinematic way. It adds a lot of layers to
the storytelling. I'm sure each time I replay this, I'll notice another place
that this comes into play.

After the credits rolled and I was thrown back in the main menu, I was greeted
with a _nice surprise_: ||You can replay the game with the narrator replaced by
other members of Senua's party||. I have yet to do this, but I _really_ love
the idea. This is already a game I plan to play again multiple times in the
future. That will add **even more** to that experience. It's such a nice touch,
and a perfect fit for the game.

## Perspective

It's really cool to me that Senua doesn't really have any "superpower". She's
special because of her _unique perspective_. She sees the world in a
fundamentally different way to those around her. Due to this, many in her past
have shunned her for being different. On the other hand, the allies she finds in
this game all see this as her **strength**. Her perspective gives her the
closest thing we see to a superpower in this game: _empathy_. By the end, Senua
accepts this part of herself as well.

The game plays with this in a number of ways. All the puzzles involve
perspective in some way, even if it's just "go look at this from another angle".
It's also how Senua wins all of the biggest confrontations. Her _empathy_ was
the better way all along. Slowly, she shifts her perspective more and more. She
leans harder on her _empathy_, and drops the **violent rage** that kicked off
the whole story.

# Conclusion

_This game impacted me so deeply that **I spent more time writing about it than
playing it.**_ That's how dense with meaning every minute of the game was. Trust
me. Do not let the playtime of the game put you off. It's got more impact
crammed into those 8 hour games than _almost any other game I've played_.

**10/10.** I can not possibly give this game a higher score. I consider it one
of the all-time greats---currently my 4th favorite game ever, beating out Alan
Wake 2. It's one of the now 6 games I've given a 10/10. I don't give that out
lightly.

How could it possibly climb higher?

Well, I don't consider it my **favorite**, there are still 3 games ahead of it.
If I had to nitpick, it could have slightly less combat and puzzles, and
slightly more story content. One more arc would have been really nice to see,
and it would have made that last arc even more emotional. As I said though, this
is me reaching for any possible place the game could be improved. It's already a
**10/10 game**.

I **strongly** recommend this game. It's on Gamepass, it runs well even on my
last gen mid-tier card, and it's not a large time commitment. The barriers to
play it are very small, and it is my favorite game of the last 4 years.

_Play it. Play it. Play it._
