---
title: The Outer Worlds
brief:
tagline: Who are you and what have you done with Obsidian?
series:
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

Finished The Outer Worlds. Actually got all the way through it this time,
instead of abandoning it within a few hours. It's not worth it. What an
abysmally mediocre game.

### The Good

Some pretty excellent character writing. I enjoyed bringing my
far-too-sweet-for-this-world ace lesbian mechanic to the bar to encourage her to
ask out her crush, bringing the prison priest to visit a hermit for a
space-psychedelics trip to come to peace with entropy and his own imperfection,
and exploring the relationship of the head of dock security who keeps impounding
his secret lover's smuggling ship so they can spend more time together. I didn't
care at all about the main story, but these moments (and more) were great. The
writers really killed it when they were allowed to be creative and write human
stories.

There were some jokes that really got me. There were some moments that really
touched me. There were some decisions I really had to sit and think about. There
_were_ good moments in this game, and the high points were decent. I just wish
there were more of them instead of loads of padding built up around what should
have been a 2 hour demo.

The best thing this game did was || letting me fail a skill check at the end,
sending the whole mcguffin ship into the sun, killing everyone I was "trying to
save" (really, just following what the main NPC guy told me to do for no reason
other than it's what the game tells me is "the main story"). A fitting dumpster
fire of an ending for a dumpster fire of a game, with a hard cut to credits and
no fanfare. ||

### The Bad

Unfortunately it feels like the writers were fighting literally the rest of the
team (and especially management) the entire time. Every other aspect of the game
is bad and serves only to weaken the impact of the writing.

- Who do you fight throughout the majority of the game? Marauders. Are they
  like, a faction or something? No, they're just too angry and stupid to talk.
- What's their motivation? Anger.
- What are they angry at, what caused this anger? They're marauders, so they're
  angry.
- Is there any peaceful way to deal with them ever? No, they're sub-humans
  according to literally every NPC. There's no chance at talking things out
  because they _literally_ can't talk.

These guys are peppered across the game like someone thought, "the player
doesn't spend nearly enough time in our terrible combat system naturally, force
more combats! Especially with humanoid enemy types!" and then invented the
marauders specifically for that purpose.

The main quest is dull and (to be blunt) bad. The first NPC you talk to
literally tells you the whole plot right at the start, "I only had enough
revive-juice to save you, we need to make enough to save everyone else on your
ship". That's it. That's the plot. That's not the initial hook before things go
in a more interesting direction. That's literally the entire story. It's padded
out with 30 something fetch quests, because everyone you talk to wants a favor
from you before they'll give you any information.

There isn't even any interesting development given to any major players in the
story.

- Why did the Board do this? They're evil.
- Why are they evil? Because they're the Board, can't you see?
- Why do I want to save the people on the ship? I don't have any attachment to
  them at all, I've never met any of them in my life. We were all just selected
  at random to be on this ship. These are the fellow passengers of my public
  transport, and nothing more. Why do I care? Because saving lives is good! It's
  the obvious good thing! Also The Board:tm: (who is evil btw) doesn't want
  this, so wanting it must be good! ~~please ignore the literally hundreds of
  lives you will have to end with your own hands to even come close to
  accomplishing this goal~~.
- Why did this NPC start this whole deal by saving me? What plans does he have
  for taking care of people after they are woken up? There are no plans. He's
  just doing this seemingly because The Board:tm: (who is evil) doesn't want it
  to happen. Does he have some kind of anti-capitalist or anti-authority angle?
  No. Literally his entire personality is getting this one task done, and being
  a little bit quirky.

As good as some of the companions are, the way they are delivered to you is just
lazy. One of them literally waited outside my ship one day and begged to join
me. Another was going to help me on a main story quest, and just somehow became
a crew member without any fanfare, even though it turned out I didn't need her
help at all for the quest? It goes on and on. A few at least had side quests or
offered to join you after one of the quests you were on helped them in some
significant way. Most of them felt like the game had a "crew character quota"
and desperately threw the characters in random places trying to meet the quota.

Additionally, even the _good_ writing bits started to get old. The game isn't
just one note, it's one note played with no rhythm, just equally spaced and
maddening.

I also just don't like how the game looks. It feels confused. There's definitely
an artstyle that they're going for: A mix of Star Wars, Fallout, Firefly, and
like, Borderlands, of all things? Then it's got a heavy helping of
cartoonification on top. Personally, I don't think I would have liked the
aesthetic even if it worked, but it gets worse. It feels like a bunch of "high
quality" graphics features were slapped on top after the art was all done, with
no thought for how they would fit into the artstyle. The cartoony characters all
have extremely shiny, reflective eyes that treat light in such a different way
than any other texture around them that they look photoshopped in. Most
characters' skin looks like they are wearing a heavy layer of makeup and then
got super clammy on top of it. Lights and shadows were done "realistically" at
the last moment (or so it feels), making a load of environments literally
impossible to see in during the wrong times of day, or too bright to look at
during other times of day. But even in the darkness, the weirdly shiny eyes
would stick out.

### The Ugly

This combat _sucks_. I can slow time for long enough to shoot twice, and double
tap space (awkward) to do a "dodge" that's so imperceptibly slow/short that I
had to look it up to make sure it wasn't bugged or tied to framerate or
something. There are no grenades, no special moves, nothing. I literally walk
towards enemies, point, and shoot. All the fun stuff is saved for companion
abilities, which are like 5 second long cutscenes that interrupt any shred of
flow the gameplay had. They obviously wanted you to use these moves, because
they are _damage boosted to hell and back_ and _all of your other damage output
is weak as hell_. Are they at least cool to watch? No. The preacher guy's
"ability" is literally just A) making a quip, and B) shooting the gun he was
already shooting, once, dealing like 20x the damage his shots normally deal. The
flow of combat is constantly interrupted for _that_. At least Mass Effect let
you command your allies and still play the game in the meantime. I'm baffled
that they chose to do this instead. I set the game on the easiest difficulty
just to be done with it sooner, and it was still such a drag that I ended up
running through and ignoring every combat I was allowed to.

Oh also, weapon degradation is in. Why is it in? It fit in the Fallout games due
to the themes of those games, and the slower pacing and ability to avoid combats
made it make sense as a meaningful choice. This feels copy-pasted in without
consideration for why it was included in other games in the first place. It just
serves as a way to drag combats out further and further, as you are basically
_forced_ to fight your way through hoards of enemies between every repair bench.

This game also has the "Starfield Problem", years before Starfield released. The
game is made of a series of tiny, very-linear space sandboxes that only connect
to each other by your ship. Everything is so disconnected and discontinuous that
it never feels like I'm exploring anything, and instead I'm just a robot
following quest markers, killing enemies on the way, and delivering the relevant
NPCs where they need to go so that _they_ can advance the story.

### Final Thoughts

Anyways, 3/10 game. I do not in any way recommend. I'm glad I finished it to
sate my curiosity that maybe it got better later.

There's part of me that is now much less hopeful for Avowed. There's part of me
that still has hope, though: The Outer Worlds 2 supposedly comes out later this
year. Potentially, that means the teams that worked on The Outer Worlds and
Avowed are separate. I'm hoping the same people that made Pentiment are working
on Avowed, that game is fantastic, and shows that Obsidian still has it. Fingers
crossed!
