---
title: Yakuza Kiwami 2
published: "2024-03-07"
series: Yakuza / Like a Dragon
tagline: A poorly timed remake of an overrated game
tags:
  - reviews
  - games
---

I had heard so many good things about this one, but honestly is was my least
favorite so far. I wonder if part of that is how low my expectations were thanks
to the opinions I'd already heard, but even trying to ignore that, it was still
a downgrade from the others. Not that I didn't like this game overall. There's
still plenty to enjoy, and it's better than many other games I've played. If
this is the lowest Yakuza gets for me, that's great.

~~kinda dreading 6 now though~~

# Gameplay

The new engine sucks (or at least it's terribly applied in this one).

**TL;DR** everything feels floatier and bouncier, like everything in the world is
made of inflatable kickballs.

It makes interacting with pretty much anything way more frustrating. It's
apparently due to everything being tied to framerate. I tried capping my
framerate, but the framerate cap in-game is broken. Setting it to 60 gave me
under 20 fps most of the time. So I decided to uncap it and just deal with the
jank. I still hate how this game looks compared to the previous 2. Everything is
shiny and the contrast is cranked up by 5x. It's like they didn't know how to
tastefully apply all the new effects the engine allowed, and just went with
more-is-better. Because of this, I'm now kinda dreading 6, the first game to use
this engine. 7 and onwards also use it, but they look way better so I guess by
that point they figured out how to make it look good (and my combat complaints
will go away in a turn based game).

## Combat

Combat was absolutely the weakest so far, by every metric. Both enemy variety
and player combat style variety was worse. Every single punch felt less precise.
The dodge and block systems are nonfunctional. I basically just powered through
every encounter with the overpowered weapon system, which feels like the
intended way to play, but is boring. However, once I got more upgrades and was
able to spam more heat moves, that was fun again. The heat moves felt
mechanically weaker than previously, which was strange due to their animations
being more brutal than ever, but at least I could spam those brutal animations.
(Reminder that Kiryu has never killed anyone).

# Story

This one was about twice as long as Kiwami... but I feel like the story actually
had less content. It was just padded to shit. The writing had all the flaws
Kiwami did (makes sense, same era of RGG), but it clearly felt like they had
less time to prepare it as they never planned to make a sequel in the first
place. Too many throwaway villains introduced 5 minutes before their betrayals
meant none of them felt like betrayals. The story felt like it was setting up
loose end after loose end with no resolution until one _massive streak of tying
everything up together all at once at the end_. I did like that ending sequence
though. It was pure action B movie nonsense in the best way. Especially because
it managed to subvert my expectations while still making sense. I only wish they
focused on the final boss more as a villain, instead of getting distracted by
other stuff throughout the rest of the game. The romance subplot also felt very
forced, and every kiss being accompanied by 2000s Linkin Park style alt rock was
a glimpse back into 2000s culture in a bad way lmao.

# Rating

7/10. Still a good game overall. I enjoyed playing it. For a ballpark, this is
the score I gave release Cyberpunk 2077 and Starfield. Deeply flawed games, but
there's some fun to be salvaged. Unfortunately this one is _already_ the remake,
so it's not going to improve from here. Despite all the hate above, the Yakuza
charm is still there.

Looking forward to the Majima chapters, as those were written much more recently
(and after Yakuza 0, which had _excellent_ writing). Maybe I'll bump the game to
8/10 after?

Then it's on to Yakuza 3, which is now the "oldest feeling" entry in the series,
due to how the remakes were done. It's not in a new engine like Kiwami or Kiwami
2, it's in an older engine, and sticks closer to the original game. I've heard
it's divisive in the community, but those who disliked 2 tended to like 3, so
I'm hopeful.
