---
title: Yakuza 4
tagline: A fantastic evolution
series: Yakuza / Like a Dragon
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
published: "2025-01-19"
---

The best since Zero. This introduced some very enjoyable twists to the Yakuza
formula that defined the Yakuza series for the next several entries. This feels
like the pinnacle of the old style of Yakuza games.

I took a pretty big break between playing 3 and 4. I was very distracted with
other series. Also, while I _did_ very much enjoy Yakuza 3, it had some pretty
serious pacing issues sometimes that may have slightly dampened my enthusiasm to
start another Yakuza game right away.

Once I started playing, though, all my hesitation was blasted away. This game
maintains excellent pacing throughout and kicks off in a super interesting way.
It also felt really good to be back after so much time away. I love this silly,
over-dramatic series so much.

---

# The Review {style="display: none"}

## Audio & Visuals

This is not a "new" looking game, by any means, but I found myself impressed
with it more often than not. It looks great for a 2010 game, especially one made
in a year. The remaster helped, certainly---but outside of a few cases where
character designs were completely reimagined, it feels like it mostly sharpened
everything up a bit and added some contrast. The overall art, cinematography,
animations, facial expressions, and all the other "core" stuff was the same
before the remaster.

The music is up to par with what I expect from the series at this point. There
weren't many specific songs I could pick out from the soundtrack that
specifically jumped out at me as things I needed to share. I did really love a
few though: battle themes. For example,
[Massive Fire](https://youtu.be/rn5RcTcDVHA),
[All My Pride](https://youtu.be/sMDlWf3QB0I), and
[Receive and Bite You](https://youtu.be/3OjillYVV6Y) stood out. I was never
disappointed with the music. It always set a good tone for whatever was
happening on screen. Good stuff.

What I really appreciated on the audio side for this game was that it felt like
there was more voice acting than ever. Yakuza is a series that frequently
switches between storytelling styles. You've got simple text cutscenes where the
characters face each other and occasionally nod or do a canned animation. You've
got the slightly more high budget voiced scenes. And then you've got the full
quality, cinematic cutscenes. I don't think any of these games had the frequency
and quality of that last, best kind since Zero. A large portion of the time, it
felt like I was watching a good crime drama with a game attached. Huge fan.

## Story

This was a massive improvement over the other games. I can see how a lot of the
storytelling direction and quality this game took on would later become the
backbone of Zero. Zero improved the formula even further, but it's cool to see
how it started here.

This game had several pacing advantages.

First, it was broken up into 4 protagonists' stories that all intertwined. This
was the most impactful part of Zero, and it's cool to see it get its start here.
Each character's section had its own rise and fall, its own arc. It never felt
like any of the stories were padding for time or stalling out, because they were
all relatively short and self-contained.

Second, the ways each arc revealed things about the greater plot was very
satisfying. It would drop just enough information to give you more questions
than answers, and leave you reeling wondering what the implications are. Then it
would drop you in an entirely different story another character was going
through, making you wait in anticipation for that next hit of intrigue.

Third, the overall energy and tone of each arc followed the arc of the overall
plot. The first arc is way more chill than the last arc, even if both have their
high energy and low energy moments. While each arc "resets" to a low intensity
state at the start, each of those resets starts at a more interesting point than
the last. It's just solid writing fundamentals, which sounds basic, but a lot of
games from the time felt like they didn't have even this.

The story is very good. I really enjoyed the characters, their individual arcs,
and how it all comes together. This game also tied together a lot of story
elements from the previous games in a satisfying way, improving my opinion of
the Yakuza series storyline as a whole.

The story also sprinkles in some great fanservice moments without feeling like
that's the only thing it has to offer. For example, you sometimes get the
opportunity to fight one of the other protagonists in a boss fight, before
eventually teaming up against them. You get to see tons of iconic characters
from the previous games in a new light. I also giggled with glee at the
presentation of the ending || with the 4 protagonists jumping out of a
helicopter in matching black suits, each squaring up against the antagonist most
poetic for them to face, and then starting a verbal duel with each before the
fights begin ||. I can only call it (ironically) unironically peak fiction.

However, there were some flaws here and there. All tutorials in the game are
explained in character. For the older Yakuza games, that is fine (maybe even
good). The problem with that in this game is that the characters share a load of
mechanics, and they all have _different_ fictional justifications for doing so.
So each one must go through a separate tutorial for mechanics the player is
already familiar with. These are presented sorta like forced sidequests that
interrupt the story and flatlining the pacing.

## Gameplay

Extremely solid. Would be my favorite so far if it weren't for Zero. At the time
this released, it was peak Yakuza gameplay.

Each of the 4 protagonists has a very different moveset. One is very technical
and is strongest when taking initiative and chaining enemies in long,
stagger-locked combos. Another is heavy and slow, knocking everyone else around
with charged strikes while never falling over yourself. Another is agile and
focused on strong defensive options like parries, counters, and grabs. And
finally you've got the classic: Kiryu's all-rounder brawler style. On top of the
different base movesets, each has their own set of heat moves, upgrade paths,
dodges, and so on. Each arc almost felt like playing a whole different game.

Each boss was tailored around being fun to fight as the matching playstyle, too.
Sometimes that meant a _great_ matchup in your favor, with the boss's weaknesses
aligning directly with your strengths. These happened often at the start of
arcs. Later on, you'd face fights in which the strengths of the boss would
challenge you to use each character's toolkit in new ways. This progression made
every boss satisfying.

I mentioned earlier that you face other protagonists as boss fights
occasionally, and that's really cool. What's super cool about it from a gameplay
perspective, is that _you already know the boss's moveset_. You were playing as
that boss for _hours_ before, mastering each move as you unlocked it, and that
was only a few hours ago now. These fights were my favorite. Not only were they
often charged with a lot of emotion and/or served as fun fanservice content,
they were uniquely interesting challenges that made me feel like I had truly
mastered the combat system. There's no feeling like stopping a combo at three
hits and then dodging, because you know the other guy is about to super-armor
through it, because _that's what you would do_. It feels like mind-games in a
fighting game. It's also super thematic for the series, as Yakuza is **full** of
moments where sworn brothers must fight, enemies bond and learn about each other
over crossed blows, and so on. _That's what these moments are_, and this
gameplay made me _feel_ that more than just knowing it from the story.

Additionally, the gameplay feels overall more polished than the earlier games.
Movement is less stiff and has a bit more weight to it, but still feels precise
and controllable. The balance between regular attacks and heat actions is pretty
much perfect. Navigating the world is smoother and easier than ever before.

This game also added some interesting new areas to familiar old maps. Kamurocho
is the staple city of the series, but Yakuza 4 expanded on it. Now you can take
rooftop routes through the city, either as shortcuts or as ways to avoid some
heat. You can go into an underground mall and sprawling underground parking lot.
These extra layers change navigation through the world in a really clever way.
The map is never expanded horizontally, you're still navigating the same exact
streets as always. There's just added verticality and more options to traverse
than ever. Knowing all these shortcuts makes me feel like I know these streets
better than ever. They're also used in the story very frequently, which helped
me learn them and rely on them.

My one complaint for the gameplay is that random battles were extremely
frequent. It felt like I couldn't walk 30 feet without getting in a fight. I
don't mind some random encounters to keep the action going and ensure I'm never
going too long _only_ walking from story beat to story beat, but this was
excessive.

## Final Thoughts

**Rating: 8/10**  
_Playtime: 17 hours_

I really, really enjoyed this one. I'm impressed with how much they improved
_everything_ in only a year. The visuals are significantly cleaner and more
cinematic. The writing is **loads** better. The gameplay is way more streamlined
and fun, with loads more variety. This feels like the game where the series
really takes off and sets its course for the future. Easily one of the best in
the series so far!
