---
title: Final Fantasy XII
tagline: Not a game, but a shadow cast by the distant idea of one
series: Final Fantasy Retrospective
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

It has taken me a long time to write this. I finished this game on August 16th,
over two months ago. It's hard to write about something that failed to inspire
any interesting thoughts. That's my main criticism: This felt like a derivative
product designed by committee.

I felt _a lot_ of Star Wars while playing this. From some searching around
online, it seems I am very much not alone. However, there seems to be a common
sentiment that the story is essentially ripped directly from Star Wars, and I
don't think that is the case. You can boil down many stories into their
essential parts and compare them, and you'll find it all-to-easy to latch on to
patterns that aren't really there. It's _the rest_ that made me think of Star
Wars: The scene direction, the tone, the music, and the characters. The Final
Fantasy series is no stranger to Star Wars references and influences, but this
game really leaned into it.

Unfortunately, I don't really like Star Wars.

So, this game started from a place I was already going to find difficult to
appreciate, and built on that foundation by repeatedly sabotaging its own vision
with market trends and executive decisions. It bears the weight of design debt
incurred by abandoning multiplayer support partway through development. It's a
game of compromises, without a central vision. It might have had one, at the
start, but Yasumi Matsuno had to leave his directorial position partway through
development, and it went through multiple delays as the design was pivoted again
and again. This is not a game, but a shadow cast by the distant idea of one.

I think this shows the start of Final Fantasy development becoming unwieldy. It
was growing too big for their increasingly-outdated development style to handle.
Huge 3D games like this one are hard to make, taking significantly more time and
effort from much larger teams. Additionally, Square and Enix had only recently
merged, and there was significant financial pressure on Square in recent
history. This was the first mainline game released in that environment.

The era of Square chasing market trends had already begun. FFIX and FFX were
partially created to integrate with online services during development right in
the middle of the dot-com bubble (though thankfully those plans were largely
abandoned by their respective releases), and FFXI being the first cross-platform
MMO. You may have recently heard about Square Enix considering integrating NFTs
into their games. I'm sure we've all seen massive graveyard of Square Enix
mobile releases. They've been in the tech-hype trenches for decades, and this
game was one of the earliest casualties.

All of these factors combined to make FFXII a product first, a work of art
second. Not only did that make it significantly less impactful as a work of art,
it ultimately made it a worse product. Unfortunately, looking back from the
present, I don't think Square Enix would go on to learn that lesson for many
years and multiple mainline releases.

# The Review

I have given this game quite a bit of time to sit in my head. I've let the ideas
and impressions roll around. I hoped that at some point, something might click,
and I'd look back at the cool parts fondly. Instead, I mostly remember the
negatives.

I don't think this is a bad game. It's just a very bland, average one. It's _the
video game_ of all time.

## Gameplay

I had a lot of hope for this gameplay. From the outside, it sounded really
interesting and unique. It certainly is one of those things. I can now see why
nobody has ever attempted to copy this gameplay style again.

I'll start with the positive: This was the first game in the series to do away
with random encounters. Instead, you can see enemies in the world as you walk
around, and you engage them in combat simply by walking up to them. This means
you can usually avoid them if you want. Sometimes, the game can even make it
challenging to do so by placing enemies in narrow choke-points---giving you a
natural reason for a forced fight and allowing for a bit of skill expression
through sneaking through gaps. This is something that I've greatly appreciated
in more modern JRPGs, and it's really cool to see this feature present in a game
from almost two decades ago. I don't know if it was the first, and I don't know
if it was influential in other games adopting this feature. It's still neat to
see.

I'm afraid the positivity ends here. We're less than 800 words into this nearly
4000 word review. I'm sorry, FFXII.

The version I played has a Job system. _The original did not_. Everyone just
shared one huge progression tree. If you wanted a character to be a mage, you
had to figure out where on the _huge_ License Board you wanted to go, and start
working in that direction. The Job system version splits these nodes up over a
dozen jobs with some overlap. You can give each character two jobs, and there
are 6 playable characters. In theory, this gives each character more of a
defined role. In theory.

It sounds on the surface like this might be an incredible way for players to
express their individuality. There are countless possible ways you can level
your characters! Unfortunately, _every single one of those skills is boring_.
90% of the board is just access to specific equipment. Note: not categories,
_specific equipment_. Did an enemy just drop a shiny new helmet? Nobody can
equip it until you find which skill unlocks that specific helmet, and unlock it
for them. With the job system, you might not even know which character can get
that skill until you manually search through all of their License Boards. Those
points are then wasted the moment you find a better helmet. This is hellish game
design. I'd expect this of a parody, not a serious product.

What about the rest of the skills? Mostly "number goes up", but not even in
interesting ways. More damage is added, more health is added, more mana is
added. No multipliers. No conditional passives or chance based effects. The
closest you get to anything interesting is magic, and that falls into one of
three categories: make your numbers go up or their numbers go down, heal, deal
damage. There's nothing interesting about the magic. Some enemies are weak to
ice damage, so you do ice damage to them instead of fire damage or whatever
else. This has no opportunity cost, no secondary effect, and isn't divided
across character builds in any interesting way. It's no different than the
weapon-swinging characters getting a "+200 damage" bonus.

I never felt surprised or excited by what I was picking from the License Board.
I always knew that I was going to become linearly more powerful in some tiny,
incremental way. I always knew it was going to be a slog of slow decision making
and checking over multiple menus. I always knew it was going to be disappointed.
This system even took away the possibility of the fun of knowing you've leveled
up and get to go check what new treat you'll get. Different things cost
different amounts of points, and it's never clear when you have enough to buy
something unless you check. How dull. They turned a core component of the RPG
genre into routine grocery shopping, a literal chore.

So, with all of those linear power boosts, do you at least get to feel the
difference through tactile gameplay? It can feel really different when you set
up for a big move and one-shot an enemy that used to take multiple hits. Even if
linear damage increases are boring, that can be legitimately transformative.

Nope. Not a chance in hell.

This game is designed around auto-battling. You walk up to enemies, and then
take your hands off the controller and watch as the same 2-3 combat animations
repeat 30 times until it is over.

I was so thoroughly disappointed by this, because I was looking forward to it.
You program your characters individually with "Gambits". Each Gambit is a
condition and an action. "When a party member is unconscious, cast Raise." "When
an enemy has the lowest HP nearby, attack it." "When the buffs have worn off,
cast all the buffs." The sound of _programming_ my characters sounded really
interesting (and I'm still holding out hope for Unicorn Overlord), but this is
trivial stuff. For every ability in the game, there's an obvious Gambit that
should be used, with very little variation. Your mages should always cast spells
that enemies are weak to. Your buffs should always be recast. Everyone's health
should stay above a certain threshold. If nothing else more pressing is going
on, enemies should be attacked. It never felt like an interesting choice. It
just felt like I was being asked to input the single correct option for every
ability, on every character, repeatedly. Another chore.

All set up so that you can walk away while the game plays itself. The gameplay
was so boring that _it included a 6x speed boost at launch_. **You're meant to
skip it**.

I played FFI through FFVI via the Pixel Remaster releases. These releases come
with speed boosts and auto-battle features. I was a heavy user of those features
in all six of those games. Somehow, I was more engaged by combat in those games
than this one. Even accepting auto-battling and speed boosting as things I can
enjoy, the combat and progression systems in this game were simply not enjoyable
for me.

Boss fights were the worst casualty of this gameplay style. Not only were they
longer, more repetitive versions of the same boring fights, they didn't even
have the tiny bit of gameplay input that the rest of the game had: pressing up
on the control stick to get to the next fight. They also tended to be dumped on
you arbitrarily and without any buildup. Daryl Talks Games recently released
[an excellent video about "what gives a boss aura"](https://youtu.be/Fganua0hk58).
Every single boss fight in this game could easily fit into his list of the worst
possible examples. They just kinda pop up out of nowhere and attack you. There
are at least _a couple_ story bosses that are a tiny bit better than this, but
most of them still feel arbitrary and boring.

Navigable areas were similarly uninteresting. They were vast, empty, and
repetitive. They really leaned into quantity over quality. The gameplay between
story beats involves holding the control stick forward towards each fight, and
occasionally adjusting the camera angle to turn down a different hallway.
Another great use for that speed boost is flying by all these many pointless
maps. Seriously, it's like someone mandated that the characters could never "cut
past the travel" and we had to show every step of them walking across
continents.

I'm sure a lot of effort went into creating those zones. It just seems
misplaced---poor direction. This was likely one of the most expensive parts of
developing the game, and not only did it fail to add anything meaningful, it
actively made the experience worse.

The other thing that repeatedly frustrated me was the constant padding for time
with useless fluff. To get through _this_ area, you must go track down 6
moogles! To get through _that_ area, you must have already completed a random
side quest from three zones ago, from an NPC who sounded like they were trying
to scam you. Oh hey, time to wander this city aimlessly, spamming a button to
cause annoying voice lines and animations to play until a meter fills up a
glacial pace. No sir, sorry, we can't let you board the taxi until you've played
a memory game of connecting a dozen random street NPCs together in the right
orders (with 5 times as many NPCs in the way that _aren't_ part of the quest,
just as red herrings). Fantastic.

All of that said, I can see how a certain type of gamer would appreciate this
gameplay system. If you feel satisfied that grinding for dozens or hundreds of
hours allowed you to beat the superboss, this one's for you. That's just not me.

## Visuals

After spending time trashing the environment design, I'd like to give it credit
where it's due. The vast areas presented by this game are an absolute
achievement for the hardware it was released on. There's a sense of scale that
even much more modern games fail to achieve. The artistry of every area in the
game is also extremely smooth and consistently good.

I didn't really get attached to any of the character designs. Balthier and Fran
were attractive, but otherwise uninspiring. The Viera outfits are the ultimate
"fantasy MMO female armor" (derogatory, obviously). Vaan and Penelo's designs
were the kind of nonsense I really don't care for. Ashe and Basch were both
"good enough typical fantasy designs". The Judges are iconic, at least.

I still prefer the art style of FFX, but I don't have any complaints about how
this game looked. Unfortunately, I also don't have much more to say. It did the
job adequately.

## Audio

I quite liked the voice acting. The way the script was translated is very
shakespearean, and the actors were chosen with this in mind. All had backgrounds
in stage acting, and gave performances in that manner. It's very unique for the
series. I definitely enjoy the voice work in the other mainline games more, but
because of the style choices rather than any measure of quality. I think this
style is super fitting with the rest of the game. They nailed it.

The music, on the other hand, wasn't quite so enjoyable for me. It's undoubtedly
a very high quality score. I'm listening to it right now as I write this, as I
always do for these reviews. It has an great sense of scale, and feels like the
score for an epic movie. However, not many tracks are standing out. These tracks
are meant to blend together, and fade into the background. They're not meant to
be noticed. The soundtracks of the other mainline titles are iconic because of
their personality and soul. There's a lot of detail packed into these tracks.
They're very pretty, and I'm sure there was a ton of effort put into creating
them. They just don't leave much of an impression on me.

I've picked out a few songs that stood out. However, I'm pretty sure that most
of these only stood out to me because I remember hearing them played dozens of
times in FFXIV---not because of their impact on me from this game. That's... not
a great sign for my enjoyment of this OST used in its original product. As a
sidenote, I really liked the FFXII content in FFXIV, in general. Maybe this is
just another sign that the core vision of FFXII is something I could have really
loved, if it hadn't gotten so muddied by the state of Square Enix at the time.

Here are the standout tracks:

- [The Dalmasca Estersand](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=DoQ95gjR4sA)
- [Discord](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=0dCGK8pt9uo)
- [Battle with an Esper](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=Vm0t57jH9n4)
- [Life and Death](https://music.youtube.com/watch?v=8WJz2c_Bz5g)

## Story

This is the really rough part for me.

I think some of these characters had a lot of potential. Unfortunately, late in
development, it was decided that the game needed a young protagonist in order to
sell to a young audience. This was done after the commercial failure of Vagrant
Story (a game in the same universe which has retroactively become a cult classic
due to its well written, mature story). So, Vaan and Penelo were added, and the
story was reconfigured to place them at the center.

This sucks for a number of reasons.

First, they never feel like they actually fit in. Everyone just keeps bringing
these literal children into deadly situations because they... asked to come
along? Penelo has to ||keep getting kidnapped for some reason|| to be forced
into the story. Vaan is at first a treasure-obsessed thief, and later ||starts
seeing visions||, a plot point that is never sufficiently explained and
basically gets abandoned! Yet, Vaan is the "main character" and always who you
control in towns. He would be an entirely forgettable side-NPC in any other
game, but the wise and all-knowing market research team at Square Enix decided
this was better.

Second, we don't get to meet the _actual_, **obvious** main character of the
game until a third of the way through. Ashe is so clearly the character this
story revolves around that it is painful. Thanks to Vaan, we get less time
getting to know her, and more of our time with her is spent trying to prop Vaan
up as a character and desperately attempting to justify his presence. She ends
up feeling extremely one-dimensional, making the internal-conflict that was
supposed to be the backbone of her story less of an interesting conflict and
more of a flaw that a man had to step in and fix. _sigh_

Third, that point extends to the rest of the party as well. It feels like the
other party members had a huge amount of potential for interesting character
development and intriguing relationships with the events of the plot. There are
glimpses of it here and there, as characters get scenes clearly dedicated to
their specific story. However, these feel somehow out of place in this story, as
if they are vestigial parts of an older story that got paved over by the Vaan
highway. These scenes just sort of arbitrary pop up with very little connection
to the main plot, and are never referenced again.

Finally, it feels like the whole game got child-proofed as part of this. It's so
clear that this story could have been an incredible, mature story. There's tons
of setup for political intrigue, the horrors of war, and characters with
complicated pasts and trauma. All of that gets shoved into the background, and a
very bland story gets told instead. It's got crazy, saturday-morning-cartoon
villains. All the horrors of war are glossed over. Realistic logistics are
outright abandoned in favor of having larger armies, bigger ships, and more
explosions. How does a single city produce a ship larger than itself, supporting
an army with more vessels than there are people in its population? It doesn't
matter! It looks cool! The stakes are so high! Aren't you excited?!

It's hard to tell exactly what story we would have gotten without Vaan and
Penelo, but what remains is unfortunate. Huge parts of the plot are revealed
only at the end, which makes them feel like they were pulled out of nowhere. The
actual events of the main plot are very sparse. There's so much fluff and
sidetracking that I think this 20 hour game may have had an hour of actual main
story in it.

This party also has zero chemistry. It feels like every character was designed
in a vacuum or with precisely one other character in mind. They all have their
own separate moments while the rest of the party stands by in awkward silence in
the background. There are some limited bits of interaction sprinkled here and
there, and they are legitimately some of the best writing in the game in my
opinion, but they are so incredibly rare.

There is a strange disconnect (or perhaps a discontinuity) between some of the
elements of the story and how they are presented. As I write this, I'm a decent
chunk of the way through FFXIII. I think this disconnect applies to it as well.
I think that this was a symptom of Square Enix failing to adapt to the larger
productions that their games were becoming during that era. It's hard to explain
exactly what I mean, but it feels like I can see parts of the game where an idea
was written down by one team, and then executed by another without any feedback
cycle, and oddities were left in as a "not my job" issue.

For example, at the end of the game, ||the Bahamut is falling over the city of
Rabanastre, but Balthier and Fran stay behind to fix it and save the day with a
heroic sacrifice||. That idea is easy to write down. It's a single sentence.
However, there are a ton of details missing, and it raises a lot of questions
about how that is actually accomplished, and how to best turn it into an
exciting scene. What we got was ||Balthier and Fran tinkering with tiny bits of
machinery on the _outside_ of the vessel. This thing is
**massive**---essentially a flying city. The _main power_ has failed, and
they're on the outside of the vessel tinkering with something that looks like
it's part of a loading bay||. Somehow, this works??? It makes no sense in-world,
at all. I can almost see the game of telephone happen: ||Balthier and Fran
heroically fix the Bahamut -> a camera zooms in from the outside of the ship to
show them fixing the ship -> they are on the outside of the ship.||

Obviously, I don't _know_ that it went down like that, but I can't think of any
more charitable explanation than that. There are tons of other little
continuity/logic issues like this that are all cleanly explained by this
unfortunate game-design-telephone. It's too common to be a coincidence. Now that
I've seen the exact kinds of things happening in FFXIII, it's starting to seem
like an issue with Square Enix's production pipelines at a systemic level during
this era.

I'm glad that they've gotten things sorted out in recent years.

## Final Thoughts

**Rating: 6/10**  
_Playtime: 22 hours_

I don't recommend this game. It's not the worst in the series. It's still better
than all three original NES titles. That's not a particularly high bar, though.
Also, while it's worth going back and seeing those early titles as an exercise
in experiencing the roots of the series and seeing how the early influences
evolved over the years, I don't think that's the case for FFXII. My favorite
part of FFXII is the FFXIV content, and that can absolutely be enjoyed without
playing any of this.
