---
title: Encouraged Behaviors
published: "2024-04-04"
series: TTRPG Design Rants
tagline: and How Heart Does it Better
tags:
  - ttrpgs
  - opinions
---

_Heart: The City Beneath_ solves a (admittedly small) problem I have with most
Forged in the Dark (FitD) games: xp triggers tied to playbooks.

# The Problem

In most FitD games, you earn xp towards gaining new playbook abilities and/or
adding dots to action ratings by checking off some agenda items for your
playbook or by engaging in some other behavior the game is trying to encourage.
Some classic examples from Blades in the Dark are the Cutter gaining xp by
solving situations with violence, everyone gaining xp for struggling with their
vices, and everyone making progress upgrading actions by using them in desperate
situations. This encourages everyone to play into the tropes of the genre the
game is attempting to emulate. The game is a Peaky Blinders simulator. You're
_supposed_ to be in conflict with the other players due to pursuing your own
dark impulses. You're supposed to be playing desperate, flawed people that throw
their lives and the lives of others on the line just so they can get what they
want. Those xp triggers help get everyone to do so without making it a rule that
they must do so.

But what if I want to play a big guy who _can absolutely wreck shit if he needs
to_, but prefers pacifism and solving things with knowledge when possible? What
if I want to play someone haunted with an arcane power that they reject, only
bringing it out when absolutely necessary? What if I want to play any kind of
character that isn't a one-note archetype? Blades _does_ support this, but in a
roundabout way not explicitly called out in the rules. You can pick a playbook
based on what xp triggers you want, and then take upgrades from whatever other
playbooks have the abilities you want. You aren't **actually locked** to the
abilities on your sheet. Technically all abilities are available to everyone,
and the organization onto sheets is just intended to reduce option paralysis and
provide a "menu of thematic options" for those who want it. The game is very bad
at explaining this.

Most players are going to look at the biggest, most exciting things on the sheet
first: their character's special abilities. At least, that's what I do, and
that's how I've seen others do it. The playbook-specific xp trigger is one
sentence in small, italic font tucked away in a rarely used part of the
sheet--and yet, it is the only truly inflexible, playbook-defining part of the
sheet. Additionally, it's only one line, which must be repeated every session,
which can kinda get old. "Oh, yup, my Cutter is going to get into a fight again,
putting the stealth heist at risk, because it's what my sheet says to do." Some
games keep these triggers the same on all playbooks, like Wicked Ones having
"Act Like a Monster" for everyone. This just makes things _even more one-note_,
but does at least keep everyone on the same page instead of pitting them against
each other's agendas.

# How does Heart tackle this?

Your character is made up of two mechanical parts: Calling, and Class.

The class is pretty self-explanatory. It's the big set of exciting character
abilities that will define your character's mechanics and _what they can do_.

The calling is the _reason you came down into this hellhole_. Maybe you're
chasing the meaning of strange dreams. Maybe you were forced down here by
terrible circumstances. Maybe you seek to atone. Maybe you just like dangerous
adventures. Each of these gives you a core ability, a handful of backstory
questions to answer, and a checklist of **story beats**. These could be things
like winning a bare-fisted brawl, saving a haven from destruction, kicking
someone who deserves it off a high structure, or even _suffer a specific kind of
consequence_. There are a large list of these for each calling, more than you'd
ever use in a full campaign, so you have agency over which ones your character
will actually accomplish. You'll be working with the GM to achieve these story
beats (also providing the GM with character-arc help by doing so). When you do,
you unlock upgrades from your class. _Your calling determines how your class
levels up, therefore defining what your character **will** do_.

These story beats are arranged so that over time they will create a natural
character arc. The most powerful rewards come from the story beats that are at
the end of a character's journey. Taking these beats means gaining powerful
abilities, but also signals the end of that character's story very soon. These
abilities are so powerful that most of the time they kill, incapacitate, or
retire their users--but they always accomplish what the character was seeking at
the start of their journey.

The adventurer might chase powerful beasts simply for the thrill of combat. They
might hire a bard to catalogue their exploits and preserve their memory in song.
They might save a haven from destruction. Finally, they will find a home to
settle into, or delve too deep to ever return.

The seeker of enlightenment might repeatedly warp their mind and sink deeper
into insanity. They might run low on supplies due to all the books they carry.
They might manipulate their way into a faction's authority structure in order to
gain access to the truth. Finally, they find what they were chasing and use it
to accomplish something impossible, or choose to destroy it.

The heartsong, chasing strange dreams of the Heart they've been having, may let
their curiosity lead them into danger. They might make great sacrifices to the
Heart. They might serve as an oracle of the Heart's messages. They might
befriend the terrifying nightmares that stalk the tunnels. Finally, they might
become one with the Heart and serve it eternally, or break its hold over them
once and for all.

There are more callings, and dozens more possible story beat possibilities for
each. The game even provides strong guidelines for homebrewing your own if the
included ones don't excite you.

A Heartsong Junk Mage will play very different than an Adventure Junk Mage,
without forcing repetitive behaviors. Abilities and behaviors are separate
choices, but tied together in a flexible and elegant way.

**Brilliant**
