---
title: Finding My TTRPG Style
published: "2022-03-20"
series: TTRPG Design Rants
tagline: or, Finding the Traditions I Hate
tags:
  - ttrpgs
  - opinions
---

I came to a realization recently, and felt compelled to write down some
thoughts: What I want and enjoy in an RPG seems very separated from what kicked
off the medium/hobby in the first place. Strangely, those very things are what
got me hooked originally, though I now would prefer to avoid them. I've latched
onto an element of the hobby that I originally didn't know existed and found
that I prefer it so much that I'd rather discard everything else and focus on it
alone.

RPGs branched from wargames, as far as my limited knowledge of the hobby's
history goes. That's one of the things that originally drew me in. I could make
a Wizard with a big list of spells that all had different tactical uses? I could
throw myself into combat with a giant sword and slice my way out (I was reading
Berserk when I made my first Barbarian lol)? Sign me up! I admittedly approached
the hobby like it was a videogame, as there are many memes about.

I feel similarly about puzzles. Riddles, puzzles and the like are certainly
classic in fantasy. In my opinion though, they can be included without actually
making players solve a puzzle. I don't have to drop and do pushups when my
character makes an athletics check. Why is something clearly an intelligence
check any different? Is "speak, friend, and enter" the interesting part, or is
it interesting that it blocked the way of a wizard and some hobbits, but they
solved it? Were you supposed to stop reading/watching and figure that puzzle out
first, or was it just a nice story element?

It also extends beyond puzzles a bit, to anything adjacent to a halt of
information between players (including the gm). Some games (especially ones with
older roots) seem to do their best to hide information from players, and if
players learn information outside of the game then they are discouraged from
applying or even acknowledging it. I recall seeing that one of the earlier
editions of D&D had blanks in magic item descriptions so that players wouldn't
know ahead of time what they did. You don't just tell players target numbers,
you only tell them if they passed or failed. Don't tell players what enemy
bonuses are, just their total rolls. Players are left to get rough estimates
themselves. Set Investigation DCs on all the tiny details in your dungeon.

I've often heard that a secret a player keeps secret is wasted effort. Only the
things that get brought to light in game matter. I think the same is true for
the gm. If the players never find something, did it matter? Do you really want
to put effort into something that has a decent chance of not mattering?

Really, what I _like_ about TTRPGs is **drama**. I like collaboratively creating
a story. I like tense choices, narrow victories, and the moments of calm in
between. I like interesting characters, seeing what choices they make, and
seeing how they develop and change. I didn't know I would like it that much
until I started playing and watching a lot.

It is strange to me, because I like all of these things separately. I enjoy
strategy games. I enjoy puzzles. I enjoy mysteries and uncovering information. I
enjoy experiencing and creating stories. When they mix together though, I find I
appreciate the individual parts less.

I think that is why I've been really gravitating towards simpler systems
recently, and especially towards ones that emphasize an "obstacle-driven" style,
rather than a "solution-driven" style. For a group of a wizard and some hobbits
encountering a door with a riddle, it is fun for the hobbits to chime in and
point out something hidden in plain sight without realizing it. For a group of
_all_ genius characters, a fun solution would be them spending time solving a
cypher to crack the code. For a group of all meatheads, a fun solution might be
smashing the damn door down! In all of those situations, the gm could have
simply said "there is a door with a riddle" without ever coming up with a riddle
in the first place! All the solutions are fun and fitting for different groups
of characters. All would cause interactions between characters and move the
story along.

Anyways, I'm rambling, and this is poorly organized. TL;DR -- I'm tired of
_other types of games_ being in my role playing games, even if they are the
ancestors of role playing games.

---

<small class="muted">
A secondary section that arose after more discussion:
</small>

Re: metagaming

I think what I was trying to get at was more like: I appreciate when games are
designed in such a way (or tables play in such a way) that metagaming just...
_doesn't matter._

A common example of metagaming is the troll in 5e. It **can not be killed**
unless someone either does fire or acid damage, or deals 80+ overflow damage in
a single hit to trigger an instant kill (and good luck with that at level 5ish).
You can have a party of as many players as you want, all hitting it with swords
every turn, and it won't die. The highest damage dealing spells (and sometimes
even magic items) tend to deal fire damage. There is a decent chance it'll
happen on accident, especially with fireball just being unlocked at the level a
troll becomes relevant. What if nobody in the party happens to have fire damage
readily available? How are players meant to deal with this?

You can use a torch, vials of acid, alchemical fire, or other clever uses of
mundane equipment. Even if most clever solutions are out, surely at least one
moderately-well-armored character in the party has a torch they can approach
with. Except, why would a character who depends on their sword pick up a torch
instead unless they _knew_ ahead of time that a troll was weak to fire? That
leaves you with some options:

1. At least one character in the party has knowledge of trolls, and can inform
   the others
2. The GM made sure to enable players with this knowledge ahead of time if they don't have it
3. Run away and regroup, perhaps researching what the hell that was before trying to tackle it again
4. Metagaming

Imagine instead, if the GM/rules only set up the obstacle, not the solution:

> The party is engaged with a massive, muscly monster with brutal claws. As the
> fight drags on, one of the party members notices the wounds of the monster
> closing up. No matter how many times the beast is cut down, it stands again to
> continue the fight. This is confirmed when the paladin decapitates it, but the
> head reattaches a few seconds later.
>
> This wasn't working. They needed to try something else.

Great obstacle. The party can't rely on their usual tactics, and must turn to
something else--something clever. When this is left as an open prompt, there can
be multiple solutions that different party members might be able to apply.
Perhaps the mage of the party specializes in ice magic, so they attempt to
freeze the target solid. Perhaps one of the martial characters decides to try
and separate the heart from the rest of the body. Perhaps the whole party
decides to stop trying to kill it, and instead start trying to tie it up and
capture it. The above options 1-3 are also still valid with this kind of setup.

All of these are, in my opinion, just as interesting as needing fire or acid
damage. However, the players have more input into what that solution is and why
it is interesting. It puts more trust in the players to contribute cool moments
to the story.

I just appreciate putting more trust in the players to come up with solutions.
Pre-planning the solutions (or having them pre-planned from the book) feels to
me like the players just aren't trusted to contribute. Sorry, this is _**my**_
story so the only solution is _the one **I** picked out_. I think it can be
great to see what kind of ideas other people have, and include them in the story
if they sound fun.

---

<small class="muted">
A tertiary section that arose after more discussion:
</small>

Setting-based things are grabbing my attention more and more. The strength of a
generic system is it is easy to get people involved since they only have to
learn the system once. That's certainly nice, but over time I'm finding more and
more that I'd rather try something new and tailored to the experience that I'm
really trying to have.

I think that can either be very detailed or very atmospheric though. Some games
have very rich settings and very granular rules or details about tons of
elements of the world. Others just set up broad atmospheres, principles, and
tones. The Forgotten Realms, for example, is so ridiculously detailed at this
point that you can probably look up any detail and find a resource for it.
Blades in the Dark's city of Duskvol on the other hand, is painted in broad
strokes: an industrial, dystopian city where money is king, ghosts lurk around
every corner, and the sun died long ago. There are tons of ideas in the book,
for example, descriptions of the many factions and example npcs that have ties
to all those factions--but where and when they fit into the world is up to the
gm and other players.
