---
title: Perception Checks
published: "2024-04-18"
series: TTRPG Design Rants
tagline: or, Let Us Explore the Fiction Together
tags:
  - ttrpgs
  - opinions
---

Over the years of playing TTRPGs, I'm growing to dislike one thing more and
more: **Perception checks**. Scan/Survey/Sense/Discern/Investigate/Study/Whatever. It
seems like every game has one. Some games have multiple. Pathfinder considers it
so important that every character automatically gains and levels the skill
without you even choosing to do so. Some games proudly declare that all rolls
should move the story forward, even on a failure, and then include an action
like "Survey".

Why?

# Rules Elide

I'm becoming a bigger and bigger fan of the "rules elide" mindset. The rules in
games should function to abstract away and abbreviate the things that we don't
want to focus on. This is why it's great to have a lockpicking check, because I
don't want to get into the mechanics of manipulating the pins of a lock every
time. However, I love describing rooms and situations. I love letting players
ask for more details on various things in the room. I love the exploration of an
imaginary space. Why elide that? _I specifically don't want to elide that_.

I can see an argument for that description becoming a "perception puzzle" that
players don't want to do. Like, the DM knows ahead of time that the party can
get into the house by finding the key under the welcome mat. So they set a
perception DC or something in order to find it so that the players don't get
frustrated looking in the wrong places. However, that's just not how I enjoy
prepping or running TTRPGs. If I want the house to be pretty easily entered, but
make it feel like the players are breaking in, I'm just gonna go with the first
suggestion that makes sense in those themes. Look under the welcome mat? There's
a key. Search for an unlocked window? Found one. I'm not interested in puzzling
the way through, I'm not interested in having pre-baked solutions, I'm
interested in the choices the players make and allowing them to have shared
authorship over the story. The tone of breaking into the house will be very
different depending on the players compared to what would come from my mind, and
I _love_ that.

# Impactful Rolls Only

I'm also a big fan of only rolling when consequences are on the line. "You don't
see anything" is the most boring possible consequence. Worse, it's the most
boring kind of success. So, at any time, this roll has an incredibly high chance
of being entirely worthless and boring. It's very hard to fit that into a
framework in which every roll should matter. It's even harder to fit it into
games where failure should push the story further:

> I describe a room to the players. A bland one, maybe a good resting spot or a
> spot to discuss next plans. One of them announces that they'd like to Survey
> the room to ensure nobody sneaks up on them. They roll a failure.

Failure should drive the story forward, as a rule of the game. Do I create a
threat from that roll? Was that really what the player wanted? I doubt they
intended to create a threat out of thin air when they rolled that skill. They
wanted to secure their surroundings. What would the outcome have been on a
success? That the room is still empty and quiet? That would have been the
default state, had they not rolled at all.

In other cases, the threats are more clear. You need to cross a gap between the
rooves of buildings. You roll Finesse or something to cross. You roll a failure,
and obviously you're falling.

In the perception case, the players have created a threat for themselves out of
thin air, with no benefit on a success.

In theory, I like this. It lets the players expectations of threats come alive
in the world, and their shared authorship creates a threat. However, I don't
think that's what players are expecting when they do this. Perhaps it's bad
habits from other systems that they need to unlearn, but if I explain that to
players, they'd rightly ask "then why ever roll the skill?"

It feels like it should be a saving throw or resistance roll type thing instead.

# Are Any Other Skills Similar?

I think this can often apply to social/knowledge checks as well, depending on
the system/genre. I promise you, I am a fan of your characters. I'm going to
improv favorably with you. If you want your character to lie to or convince an
NPC of something, I'm not going to nitpick your arguments unless the NPC is
clearly strong against that approach (even then, that debate can be a great
story moment). I'm going to see that lie you are telling to be an interesting
element of the shared story we are creating, and I'll do my best to find the
most interesting outcome of that interaction. I'm not going to judge you on
personal roleplaying skill. I'm also happy to let you decide if your character
knows something. I trust that you'll also seek to find the most interesting
outcome. This isn't a game to be won, it's a story to be told. Some things don't
need game mechanics to elide them.

# Is there a better way?

I like how GUMSHOE games often do this. Any skills that are
"investigative" are represented as a pool of points for each skill. At any time,
you can declare that you are using such a skill, spend a point, and the GM
**must** give you something useful based on that. This is _awesome_.
Unfortunately, many of these games also include a more standard "sense danger"
type skill, which still has all of the problems I mention above. A step in a
good direction (but not the only good direction), at least.

# Final Thoughts

Perhaps a lot of these thoughts stem from me strongly preferring so called
"story-games". I'm significantly more interested in smashing our minds together
to create a shared, collaborative story that is entertaining to all of us, than
I am in simulating a consistent, probabilistic world.

Is this just a forever GM thing? Do players actually like this? Is it just a me
thing?
