---
title: "Final Fantasy I-III"
brief:
tagline: The Famicom/NES Generation, Pixel Remasters
series: Final Fantasy Retrospective
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

Final Fantasy is a series I adore. A couple managed to make it into my
[top 10 (X) games](https://www.backloggd.com/u/Drowrin/list/ranked-favorites/).
Yet, I haven't played much of the series. I've decided it's time to play the
rest. Against every recommendation online, I'm playing in release order.

This is now the third long series I've started this year (see also:
[Yakuza](/posts?series=catching-up-on-yakuza-in-2024) and
[Mass Effect](/posts?series=finally-playing-mass-effect)), and half the year has
passed already. Surely I'll manage to complete at least one of these, right? I
foolishly included the year 2024 in the name of the Yakuza series, so I'm kinda
stuck there. I'm hoping to finish at least one series by the end of the year,
playtime be damned!

I think in the short term, this is the series I'll make the most progress on,
even though it is undoubtedly the longest. Regrettably, my wrist isn't in shape
to play a button mashing game like Yakuza, or a shooter like Mass Effect. On the
other hand, the Final Fantasy series make for great Steam Deck games, and are
much easier on my wrist. Plus, they're (mostly) comfy fantasy games, which I'm
super in the mood for right now. **Adventure awaits! Huzzah!**

So how many games are there in this series, anyways? It turns out this is
actually a difficult question. Counting various rereleases, special-editions,
spin-offs, and so on, I found
[a list of 126 (CXXVI)](https://thefinalfantasy.net/games/). Obviously that's
not what I want. I'm not such a fan that I'll play multiple versions of these
games to compare them, and I'm not interested in various PokÃ©mon Snap style
spinoffs. I want the real meaty games, and I want to play the best[^1] versions
of each. Though, when a remake differs **significantly** from the original, like
in the case of the FFVII remake series, I'll consider those separate games. If I
apply that logic to only the "mainline" (numbered) games, I'm left with a list
of 16 (XVI) games. However, I also want to include sequels and _some_ spin-offs,
but I'll be pretty arbitrary with what I include. Also, I love XIV, but I'm
going to exclude it and XI. This isn't meant to be about MMOs.

[^1]:
    "Best" is, of course, extremely subjective---and it's very complicated with
    Final Fantasy. Many rereleases/remasters have extra content (sometimes even
    **cut** content), easier/more-convenient mechanics, and so on. In general, I'll
    pick the most recent remaster, even if it introduces some flaws, but there may
    be exceptions to this in more extreme cases.

[This list](https://www.backloggd.com/u/Drowrin/list/final-fantasy-games-i-plan-to-play/)
is what I came up with. It's got all the mainline games, Tactics, the X and XIII
sequels, Stranger of Paradise, and the VII Remake series. 21 (XXI) games in
total. I'll be playing them in (mostly) release order. I'll probably wait for
the VII remakes to all release on PC, and play them last. It's worth noting that
I selected the original release entry for each of these games for the purposes
of creating this list, though I will be playing remasters/rereleases of pretty
much all of them.

> **UPDATE**: I decided to include a few more spinoffs, Crisis Core, Dirge of
> Cerberus, A King's Tale, and Type 0---bringing this list to 25 (XXV) games

Know of any other games I should include? Let me know!

~~I've already played XV and XVI, and I don't intend to replay them as part of
this blog series---but I may change my mind.~~

> **UPDATE**: I've decided I _will_ be replaying both XV and XVI to get a
> complete look at the series again. My taste in games might have changed since
> I played XV. I'll probably be able to play XVI on PC by then, too.

I've actually played a few more than that! At the time of writing this post,
I've completed the NES/Famicom generation of Final Fantasy games: I, II, and
III. Many people recommend skipping these, as they are often considered the
weakest in the series. I wanted a complete picture of the series though, and I
don't mind some old-school design even if it can be tedious. I just used guides
to get through the more obtuse parts. I'm glad I played them. It'll be
interesting to compare to the future entries, especially where they tried some
gameplay changes, kept some and abandoned others, and over time refined the
gameplay format of each generation. It was also fun seeing where this long chain
of inter-game references all started.

Fair warning, I've played _a lot_ of FFXIV. It was my introduction to the
series. Due to XIV's role as a themepark MMO full of references to old Final
Fantasy games, I'm going to recognize a lot of things from these old games due
to seeing them first in FFXIV. This is probably the opposite of the intended
effect. That said, so far it has definitely improved my experience of playing
the older games. Please bear with me, as I'll certainly include this backwards
perspective in my thoughts on each game.

---

# The NES Generation

I played the Pixel Remaster versions of these games. These are the 8th-9th
rerelease of most of these games, as far as I know.

These versions have cleaned up and often redesigned art that is much more clear
and detailed than the originals, while maintaining the same style. See
[this reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/FinalFantasy/comments/oba57r/final_fantasy_vi_pixel_remaster_background/)
for a comparison. Instead of trying to make the games look more "modern", they
have very pleasant pixel art that takes advantage of decades of improvement in
pixel art techniques. The art feels nostalgic and classic without feeling aged.
They did a really, really good job with this.

They also recreated all of the original music, overseen by the original
composer, the legendary Nobuo Uematsu. This time, they got a full orchestra to
record the tracks, instead of the chiptunes of the original versions. They sound
_fantastic_. Once again, they sound iconic and nostalgic, but with the audio
quality of more modern games. Really, really good job on this as well.

Various releases of these games over the years have changed the gameplay in one
way or another. Some have changed the magic system, or overhauled how the job
system works, or how encounters work, or even more! It can be a pain to look up
information for these games online, as you'll often reach a page that has
conflicting information based on what version is being discussed. These Pixel
Remaster versions keep it simple. They stick very close to the combat and
progression mechanics of the original, while offering some quality of life
cherry-picked from older rereleases as well as some all new quality of life
features of their own. In general, progression requires less grinding as fights
are more rewarding and shop prices are cheaper. Some of the job system changes
from earlier releases that made the games better (without "reimagining" them
like some previous releases did) made it in. New to these releases are some
massive conveniences that made me really glad I'm playing these versions.
They've got an auto-battle mode, which simply repeats the last action each
character has taken, and speeds up the combat animations a bit. Since much of
the combat is pretty simple (apply buffs, spam attacks, heal as needed) this
cuts down on the tedium. Additionally, the games are far less punishing due to
being able to quick-save anywhere out of battle, and the ability to toggle
random encounters on and off. You're still going to want a lot of random
encounters to keep up with expected character progression, but I really enjoyed
having that control. Sometimes I'm down to run in a circle to farm encounters
for xp (especially with auto-battle), and other times I just want to get through
this corridor without being interrupted.

I really enjoyed the Pixel Remasters. There are some 3D remakes of most of these
games, but I highly recommend this experience instead.

## Final Fantasy I

The game that started it all![^2]

[^2]:
    As I understand it, Square was inspired by the success of Dragon Quest,
    which remains more popular than Final Fantasy in Japan (again, _as far as I've
    heard_). Arguably, Dragon Quest was the first successful JRPG, and was the one to
    truly "start it all". That said, Final Fantasy made localization a priority far
    earlier, and is absolutely more popular worldwide. The effect Dragon Quest has
    had on Final Fantasy over the years is unmistakable, so it's worth bringing up.
    Perhaps I'll play some Dragon Quest someday!

It was very cool to see the origins of the series. It's got so many iconic
elements that stick around in the series. Jobs! White/Black/Red Mages! Warriors
of Light! Crystals! Chaos! Fiends of the elements! The elemental types
themselves! Airships! Flying fortresses! Cid! Matoya! Light and Darkness!

Many other elements of this game are pretty standard RPG stuff. You can
especially see the influence of early Dungeons and Dragons on it. Very cool to
see the unique Final Fantasy designs that made it stand out.

### Story

The story of this one is interesting, if simple (sorta).

We start with four Warriors of Light, each bearing a depleted crystal. They are
hired to go save a princess who has been kidnapped by a rogue knight named
Garland. Standard fantasy stuff! What's interesting is that rescuing the
princess was pretty straightforward. It's only the beginning of the journey, not
the ultimate goal.

Instead, the heroes travel the world, solving problems caused by four elemental
fiends, and restoring energy to their depleted crystals. I'm skipping over a lot
here, as the process of restoring each crystal and the problems they solve for
people are all small (but good) stories of their own, but they ultimately don't
matter in the grand plot. It's a series of small adventures as part of a larger
legend. The important part is the crystals, and the elemental fiends who must be
defeated in order to accomplish this.

With the crystals restored, a time warp suddenly occurs, drawing in the power of
all four crystals and then the warriors themselves. They are brought 2,000 years
into the past, to witness the creation of the fiends from the energy that was
just drawn into the time warp ahead of them.

It is revealed that Chaos had created a time loop. The fiends were created by
elemental energy and then sent into the future to cause the problems for the
warriors to solve and thereby gather elemental energy, and the energy gathered
by the warriors would be pulled back in time to create the fiends. It is also
revealed that the rogue knight Garland was actually Chaos, and that the time
loop allows him to live forever and ascend above time.

The Warriors of Light were always destined to save the world in the future, as
dictated by the time loop. But now, knowing of the loop, they ascend with Chaos
to defeat his true form in the past, breaking the loop and _truly_ saving the
world this time.

It got a lot more wild than I expected for a first entry, and that crazy style
is probably the most important thing defining the series going forward. Final
Fantasy never makes "normal" fantasy games. There's always a twist, subversion,
or deconstruction of some kind. There's always some convoluted writing that I
find charming.

### Gameplay

This was... okay. It's very basic.

It's a turn based game with random turn orders per round, but you have to commit
to your course of action before knowing the order. This limits strategic options
significantly, and makes the game very swingy. For example, you may want to heal
everyone after the boss hits you with an AoE attack, but the order might go:
Heal (everyone is currently at max health, wasting the spell) -> Boss attacks at
the end of the round -> Boss goes first next round, before you can heal, killing
everyone. Sometimes I'd also want to raise somebody and then drop a potion on
them, but the potion would happen first and get wasted. Buffs would go off after
the targeting character attacked. It's a mess.

I didn't find it particularly hard, at least. Once I got used to planning my
trips and stocking up on the consumables I might need, it was straightforward,
if a little tedious.

There were some small elements of strategy though. A tank class could swap in
for characters that were about to take lethal damage, absorbing the blow with
their much higher defenses and health pool. Enemies had various elemental
weaknesses, or resistance to physical damage, so an elemental mage was a must.
Debuffs needed to be cleansed. Buffs needed to be applied. It was barebones, but
definitely functional.

Spells work similar to Dungeons and Dragons. You've got leveled spell slots and
spells that fit into each. It's a little simpler, but I found it familiar and
easy to manage.

Figuring out where to go was a chore. I'm glad I used a guide, because some of
the intended actions to progress the story were so hidden that my playtime would
have quintupled without any additional enjoyable moments. If you play this one,
I highly encourage you to use a guide as well.

Future games took some elements of this system and iterated on it. So it's
interesting to have this as a baseline for comparison, even if I didn't
particularly enjoy it. At least, I didn't find it actively harmful to my
experience. It was mostly neutral.

### Rating

**6/10**  
_Playtime: 14 hours_

Even if the combat wasn't my thing, I loved the style of this game. The music,
the themes, the characters, the animations. It's a classic for a reason.

## Final Fantasy II

It's clear they experimented with this one a bit more.

Unfortunately, I think they found a lot of ways _not_ to make a good game.
Though there are a few trends kicked off by this that I'm glad they picked up
again later.

Like the first, use a guide. Don't torture yourself.

Actually, just don't torture yourself by playing this one at all.

### Story

This one is a story of rebellion. The big bad evil empire is terrorizing the
land. They're destroying whole cities for unknown reasons, and ensuring everyone
is as oppressed as possible. Why? They're evil!

Your party consists of 3 orphans chased out of one of these destroyed cities,
saved and recruited by the resistance.

This party is constantly trampled down. No NPC even begins to trust you until
you prove yourself with some feat. Literally everyone questions your ability no
matter how many powerful foes you fell. Every accomplishment is snatched up from
the party right at the finish line. Kill a big boss so you can steal X item? An
evil NPC is going to run into the scene to take it first, leaving your trip
pointless. Rushing through a dungeon to get to a destination before it's too
late? You're always just minutes late. No true victory is ever achieved.

The story constantly introduces new characters, just to kill them off before you
have a chance to get attached to them. They replace your 4th party slot, meaning
you never really get to build that slot up. You've just got to take whatever the
game gives you, only for it to be taken from you again minutes later.

The game even tried to include a very cringe sex scene, only for it to be
interrupted as it's revealed that

When you finally defeat the big bad evil emperor, the celebration is extremely
short-lived. It turns out that one of the party members' long-lost brother was
actually evil all along, and is becoming the new emperor, effectively undoing
any good that defeating the emperor _would have_ accomplished. Further, this
brother character hasn't been involved in the story since literally the first 2
minutes of the game.

Oh, was that not a pointless enough twist for you? Before you can even fight
this brother, **the old emperor comes back from hell, and announces that killing
him only made him stronger, and now is going to bring hell to earth**. Another
recently introduced party member sacrifices themself pointlessly here, for good
measure.

Evil brother joins the party, no longer evil, suddenly. You go into hell, kill
the emperor (again), and then everyone retires. Finally, the one and only time
the party actually accomplished anything that wasn't snatched from them by the
writers.

Yeah.

### Gameplay

Oh if you thought the story was bad...

This time you don't get a choice of job at the start of the game. You don't get
to customize your characters in any way, due to the story (with literally the
only thing tying the story to these specific characters being the
2 minutes of brother-betrayal).

Instead, you level up individual skills by using them. Want to do more damage
with swords? Use swords! Makes sense so far, I kind miss the job identities, but
it's not so bad... wait: Want to gain more health? Use... **shields?!** Or
finish fights at low HP without dying?! I can't even control that in this
RNG-heavy system! Want higher level magic? Use... _each individual spell
**hundreds of times** to level it up?!_ Got a shiny new magic weapon right
before a boss weak against it? Too bad you didn't decide to train that skill
**hours ago**, and it currently would do less damage than the basic weapon you
already trained with.

Just to sweeten the deal, lets throw in all of the flaws of the first game's
system as well, while removing anything good about it.

Ooo, lets add loads of mandatory grind on top! As a treat!

This one also sought to obfuscate story progress options even further. Where the
first had sometimes cryptic instructions, sometimes talking to nearby NPCs would
reveal additional details that could help. In this one, you have to click a
"learn" button on random keywords that NPCs use in dialogue, so that you can
then "ask" other NPCs about those keywords, with no indication of what will be
important where. So I just have an ever-growing list of spam keywords I shout at
every NPC to see if they can give me any details at all. By the end of it, I
usually forgot what information I was seeking in the first place.

This system sucked.

### Rating

**3/10**  
_Playtime: 8 hours_

Everything about this game felt like it hated its players. It felt like it just
wanted to be mean. It mistakenly thought that this would make it more satisfying
to complete. It did not.

I had heard many times that XIII is the worst in the series. We'll see when I
get there, but I can't imagine it's worse than this. I think it has that
reputation because, unlike this one, it's actually popular enough for people to
talk about it. This one was so bad that everyone just forgot about it.

The very few points this one earned were due to the music and art, as well as
the Final Fantasy elements that it introduced that other games would use better.
Such as Chocobo, Behemoth, Ultima, and other iconic things like that.

Don't bother with this game.

## Final Fantasy III

The triumphant return! We're back on track!

This one rejects a lot of the experimentation of FFII, and instead iterates on
the first game. I really like what they did! Jobs are back, and better than
before. We've got a heroic and fun story. This set up even more for the future
of Final Fantasy.

### Story

This one almost feels like a reimagining of the first story's early concepts.

We start with 4 orphans, being raised by a village. While exploring, they
discover a crystal, and learn that they have been chosen as Warriors of
Light, fated to prevent the Flood of Darkness.

By the power of the crystal, they are able to wield strong magic and fight with
great might. This is represented by unlocking jobs for them to select.

Our warriors venture out into the world, much the first game, to solve problems
and find the other crystals. Along the way they meet many allies and have plenty
of adventures.

While exploring the world (which appears roughly the same size as the previous
games), you reach the edge. The previous games let you wrap around the map,
because the planet is round. In this one, you can see the edge, and a sky full
of clouds below. Interesting.

After some adventures around this flat world, you gain access to a more powerful
airship, and learn the truth: this world is merely one continent of a greater,
round world, which was launched into the sky by ancient mages. Our warriors are
actually originally from the round world below.

The warriors head down to see what this great new world is like, only to find it
flooded, with only a few islands. After gaining the power of the Water Crystal
on one of these islands, the flood drains away, and reveals the original
continents. The people who lived here were preserved as statues---unpetrified
when the flood receded.

The warriors continue their adventures down here, seeking the final crystal and
solving many problems along the way. They learn that long ago, an immortal
master sorcerer had three apprentices. To Doga, he granted magic power. To Unei,
he granted control over dreams. To Xande, he granted mortality. Xande felt
sleighted by this "gift" of death, and vowed to destroy the world.

After awakening and allying with Doga and Unei, the warriors accumulated all the
final pieces of the puzzle: A massive, invincible airship, and the elemental
fangs, which serve as keys to Xande's lair.

Doga and Unei reveal that the warriors must kill them in battle, as the only
possible way to break the final lock Xande had on his tower of crystal. Doga and
Unei promise, however, that their souls will live on even though their bodies
would die.

In this tower, the warriors fall for a trap. They are paralyzed and surrounded
by five dragons---the curse of Five Wyrms. Doga appears, claiming that the souls
of five filled with light were required to break this ancient curse. We see a
montage as he flies through the realm, asking NPCs the warriors have helped
along the way. They all immediately drop what they are doing and offer
everything to help. By the power of their five souls, the warriors finish their
climb through the crystal tower, and confront Xande.

During the fight, it is revealed that the Cloud of Darkness had made a deal with
Xande, and had been manipulating him towards a Flood of Darkness. The Could of
Darkness is too strong. It defeats the warriors. Doga and Unei sacrifice
themselves to revive the warriors, and transport them into the World of Darkness
to defeat the Cloud of Darkness.

Long ago, four Warriors of Darkness prevented a calamity known as the Flood of
Light. Here, in the World of Darkness, they are trapped---bound by guardians set
up by the Cloud of Darkness. Upon defeating each of these guardians, the
Warriors of Light release the Warriors of Darkness. Together, both sets of
warriors team up to defeat the Cloud of Darkness, in the name of balance.

With the world saved, the warriors and their allies return to celebration and
retirement. We get a epilogue montage of all the important characters from the
story. It's good vibes all around.

I really liked this one. I got plenty attached to the allies accumulated along
the way. So that moment where they all risked everything to save the warriors
was really beautiful.

I also really appreciated how the explorable world kept getting bigger and
bigger.

There were sidequests to unlock big summons for the summoner job, which were fun
and very rewarding.

Speaking of summoner, this was the first game with them! They stick around and
are a huge part of Final Fantasy. That's undoubtedly the biggest thing this game
contributed to the franchise, but it also gave us moogles, titan, ifrit, garuda,
odin, and more. This really feels like where a _ton_ of reoccurring Final
Fantasy elements began.

### Gameplay

This got rid of everything I disliked about FFII, and improved a lot of what I
liked about FFI.

Jobs are no longer selected at the start of the game. Instead, they can be
swapped freely out of combat. Each character has a character level and a job
level with each job. Leveling up your character increases your stats (determined
by what job was equipped at the time) and leveling up each job improves the
abilities of that job. The character level and job level are sort of added
together when it comes to character effectiveness. So switching jobs would set
you back a little bit, but you'd still have a well functioning character while
catching up the job level. Job levels were also a lot easier to accumulate than
character levels. Perhaps 2-3 times faster, on average?

The game wasn't going to let that just exist on it's own though. They made it
more fun. Some jobs are just better in certain fights than others, and generally
you're going to want to be using more recently unlocked jobs. For example, a
dragoon can jump, taking them off the field and out of harms' way for a round.
Perfect for fighting a boss that does big slow AoEs every other turn. Another
boss might have randomly rotating weaknesses, and hitting him with the wrong
type of magic heals him instead. Good thing scholars specialize in revealing
weaknesses! Another boss might deal exclusively single-target damage that
oneshots anyone in your party... except for the viking, who also has a taunt
skill to ensure that boss always hits him. It's a neat system that encourages
exploring the combat system and trying out new things, without feeling punishing
for wanting to change up your style.

There's a little bit of character investment that's not so flexible though.
Character stat increases are determined by equipped job at time of level up, so
a character that exclusively played mages throughout the game will have better
magic stats than one that switched around a lot. It feels like Dragon's Dogma
was inspired by this. That said, it wasn't too punishing. Generally, using the
right tool for the job (right job for the job?) was still worth doing.

The only place that falls apart is spellcasting. And... it fell apart pretty
hard at the end. Like the first game, you have to buy spells from vendors to
teach them to your characters. Your characters can only hold a certain number of
spells each, and can only use spells that are on the spell lists of their jobs.
So, naturally, I had one healer, and I dumped every healing spell I could find
on them. This worked until the final boss of the game, who is nearly impossible
to kill without two healers. The problem is, this is after a point of no return,
_and_ a long dungeon. So even if I swapped one of my characters to a white mage,
they couldn't cast any healing magic because I couldn't teach them any healing
magic. I couldn't go back to a shop to buy more healing magic. If I reloaded a
previous save from before the point of no return, I'd have to redo a _massive_
chain of multiple dungeons and bosses that took me hours. The only option left
was to grind outside the final boss's area until I was so high level I could
take it on with a single healer. That was **not** a great experience. There were
a few other similar places, but none as bad as that.

Unfortunately, this game also suffered from the issues the first game had with
turn timing. Sometimes, the RNG just decides a boss gets to go twice in a row,
and that (literally) kills a run, every time. You can either overlevel so that
you can consistently clear even with bad RNG, or just keep fighting that boss
until you get a lucky run. Feels bad that there's not a more "skill-based"
option to get through it. I can't get better at the game or get better tactics
or anything. Just gotta grind it out. Not a fan.

I really had fun with it though. The big spells (especially summons) were really
fun both to acquire and to use. The later jobs had very cool abilities and I
always wanted to upgrade to them.

I appreciated that allies trailed behind you instead of taking up a party slot.
It meant that I had full control over my party. It also meant I could turn
around and ask questions of the following NPC, to help keep me on track. It was
a useful guide, and helped me get attached to the characters more by seeing them
follow me around, and talking to them in various situations to see their
responses.

Exploration content was cool. The game kept altering the travel methods
available to me in order to change the play space I was allowed within. It
consistently got larger and larger in more and more exciting ways. I got to sail
the seas, then the air, then under the seas, then I could jump mountains, and so
on. I also enjoyed the few places where having certain debuffs was required to
progress. For example, I needed to shrink my whole party to fit into certain
passages and towns, which felt very
[minish cap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Legend_of_Zelda:_The_Minish_Cap)
(one of the greatest Zelda games). Sometimes I needed to turn everyone into
frogs to swim through an underwater section. This turned debuffs that I'd
usually inflict on enemies into dual-purpose utility spells. Very cool. Even
cooler that I sometimes had to fight with these debuffs on, requiring me to
adapt my strategy to account for the debuffs. For example, being miniaturized
sets all of your physical stats to 1, so having a full caster party temporarily
helps a lot. This one was also full of secret rooms and loot which was always a
nice surprise to uncover (the others did too, but it hit different this time,
felt like a bonus instead of a requirement).

### Rating

**7/10**  
_Playtime: 18 hours_

This was not a flawless game, but it's easily my favorite of the three.

It's clearly an upward trend at this point. It's improved so many things and I
can see that this is where they really found their footing. They got cinematic
with the story in a way that really landed, and so much of that iconic Final
Fantasy flavor is taking shape.

I recognized the most from this game out of the three. A ton of content here is
used for a ton of lore in FFXIV. The crystal tower raid series is one big
reference to this game, and the Shadowbringers expansion is clearly an homage to
it.

If you're going to play one from this generation, play FFIII. Just look up a
guide. There are plenty of good ones out there, and it'll save you some trouble.

---

# Final Thoughts

I played these games in the most nostalgic way available to me: on a handheld
console (Steam Deck), tucked in bed with the lights out, staying up
irresponsibly late because I just need one more battle to level up one of my
party members. It feels weird to call these games nostalgic when I never played
them, but I feel nostalgia regardless. Maybe it's because I played other JRPGs
back then. Maybe it's just the handheld device. Maybe it's because I've been a
fan of FFXIV for almost a decade now, and it's made me feel like these
characters, themes, and art are old friends. Whatever the case, these games are
my comfy, happy place right now.

As far as I've heard, it's only up from here! I'm looking forward to it.

![As Producer and director of FFXIV, Naoki Yoshida always says:<br>"Please look forward to it."](https://preview.redd.it/7mt307nleko91.jpg?auto=webp&s=1f2b7ed9e059a9712597d7cb5f17748e843e55da 'Producer and director of FFXIV, Naoki Yoshida, in front of a fire, captioned "Please look forward to it."')
