---
title: "Final Fantasy V"
brief:
tagline: Trading story for gameplay, for better or worse
series: Final Fantasy Retrospective
tags:
  - games
  - reviews
---

This was a major step forward in the gameplay of the series. For the first
time, I found myself seeking out random battles for the sole reason that it was
fun. This absolutely carried the game.

This game has a long tradition:
[Four Job Fiesta](https://www.fourjobfiesta.com). It's part charity event (along
the lines of Extra Life marathons) and part Nuzlocke style challenge run. Anyone
can register for the event, which will display their progress through the game
on the website. At each point in the game where you unlock new jobs, the website
will tell you which of those new jobs you are allowed to play. Players have to
be creative to solve the game's various challenges while being limited in this
way. It's not uncommon to see people resort to strategies like permanently
breaking pieces of equipment for big bursts of damage to kill bosses that are
otherwise too difficult to kill with their selected jobs. For some extra fun,
the most infamous, difficult to deal with job, Berserker, is weighted based on
the total donations gathered by the event. The more people donate, the more
Berserkers will be forced upon participants. Players can donate themselves to
re-roll, but this causes the risk to continue to rise for everyone. It's a cool
event. One I may participate in now that I've finished the game once normally.

This is actually how I first discovered the Final Fantasy franchise. I'm sure I
had heard the name before, but I never actually looked into the games behind the
name until this moment. A YouTuber I watched started uploading a Final Fantasy V
Four Job Fiesta series. I didn't know what Final Fantasy was. I didn't know what
jobs were (in an RPG context). I certainly didn't know what a fiesta of four of
them meant. I looked into it, thought it was neat, and filed the thought away. I
had no access to the Final Fantasy series at the time, and I wasn't going to
watch someone play a challenge run of a game I'd never played. Years later, it's
one of the first things I think of when I hear the name Final Fantasy. My brain
autocompletes the "Four Job Fiesta" part afterwards.

I bring up all of this because I want to emphasize just how special the gameplay
of Final Fantasy V is. The fact that we've got a community-loved charity event
based around it that's been going for decades now should indicate this.

Unfortunately, not everything in this game shines nearly as bright. In fact,
this game kinda feels like two steps forward, one step back. I found _almost_
everything else to be worse than FFIV---not so terrible that it significantly
impacted my enjoyment of the game, but definitely noticeable. The things that
made IV great and the things that made V great are unfortunately incompatible.

I'm noticing a trend in the series so far. FFI, FFIII, and FFV are more similar
to each other than FFII and FFIV are. I wonder if this was an intentional design
direction, or if it was caused by a pendulum of feedback from the community:
"This one is fun, but we want more story focus!", "The story was good, but make
it more fun!" back and forth. So far, the even games have had much stronger
stories[^1], and the odd games have had stronger gameplay. The even games have
been more serious, and the odd games have been more lighthearted.

[^1]:
    The story of FFII is actually pretty weak in my opinion. However, it's
    clear that the developers were reaching for stronger, more character-focused
    storytelling in this game than they did with FFI. They then shied back away from
    this a bit with FFIII. FFII tried to bring character backstories into the plot.
    It tried to have big, dramatic moments. It tried to be gritty and dark. It tried
    to be a serious story. It failed to be _good_, but the pattern is still there.

This has been the strongest swing of the pendulum so far.

---

# The Review

## Audio & Visuals

Once again, see my
[thoughts on the Pixel Remasters](/posts/final-fantasy-i-iii#the-nes-generation)
for general notes about how these games look and feel. I'll focus on the stuff
unique to this game.

I didn't enjoy the artistic side of this game nearly as much as FFIV.

The music was good. Better than FFI and FFII, but not nearly as good as FFIV.
There were a few standouts though, such as
[the generic boss battle theme](https://youtu.be/GUL3IKbKVnM) and
[villain's theme](https://youtu.be/63VB1X8SRqY?si=c8zKgxN_p6elriCJ&t=2892).

The pixel art was also... mixed, for me. The character designs of the main cast
didn't really resonate with me. Though, some of the job sprites were very good.
The main cast's story sprites just have these bright, seemingly randomly
selected colors that clash with the environments and even themselves. The job
sprites are (mostly) much, much better looking and fit in with the rest of the
game more. Environmental art was really good though.

Another thing the developers clearly focused on this time was expressiveness.
Unfortunately, I think they took it a little bit too far. I liked what FFIV had
going on. The animations weren't sophisticated, but they got the point across
easily. For FFV, all expressions were blown up to comical, cartoonish
proportions. Character's eyes would pop out of their skulls or turn into hearts.
They'd do extremely energetic double fist pumps and flying kick animations all
the time. Everything was as goofy as possible. It felt like this game was
designed like a saturday-morning cartoon. It made it really hard for me to take
anything seriously. I love some comic relief, but this was all comedy. I found
myself needing relief from the relentless comedy instead.

## Story

Skip to [Gameplay](#gameplay) if you want to avoid spoilers.

As alluded to in the previous entry, this was an extremely goofy,
saturday-morning-cartoon story.

> Bartz, why did you and your companions risk everything, completely unprompted?

> ![--- Bartz](https://media1.tenor.com/m/XnGK5CaQTt4AAAAd/ah-eto-bleh-anime.gif)

Exdeath was a character fitting such a silly name. He was evil. That was the
entire personality. Why did he do what he did? _He's evil!_ Did anything drive him
to evil? _No, he's just evil!_ Okay, but like, is there a second personality
trait, or...? _Sometimes, he's also overconfident!_

Literally every character was written like this. Bartz wasn't really brave, just
too dumb to understand danger. Galuf was the angriest old man. Lenna was a
~~horse~~ _dragon_ girl. Faris's gender was pirate (based).

Everyone gets 1 (one) personality trait. There is no character development. You
just see these traits on display on repeat in different circumstances. Sometimes
those circumstances aren't really even that different. Here's the third time
Lenna poisons herself to save a dragon's life. Here's the fifth time Faris shows
she hates acting/looking like a princess.

It's tiring. It not only made the characters feel dull, it made the pacing
suffer due to all the repeated filler. Yes, we **have** to see Galuf get angry
at the young "whippersnappers" again after the made the same "lmao old" joke for
the 7th time. I assure you, dear player, _it's very important_.

I did like some of the grander elements of the story though. The split/merged
world concept is really neat. Krile eventually replacing Galuf and inheriting
his abilities was a cool moment. Gilgamesh was excellent, and would have been
all the comic relief the game needed on his own. Walking through the rift at the
end was cool! It's a shame that the cool stuff got drowned in cartoon writing.

## Gameplay

Now **this** is where FFV really shines.

The ATB system from FFIV is back, but it feels even more manageable this time.
The party size is one smaller, so you have fewer plates spinning. The animation
delays and the speed of the ATB bars have been tweaked so that everything is a
little smoother. In general, it felt more like I was in control and less like
the battle was progressively slipping out of my grasp.

A small note on progression before I get into the big stuff: I appreciated the
balance between previous FF games magic systems. This game uses mana instead of
spell slots, like FFIV. Unlike FFIV, however, you don't learn spells
automatically upon leveling up. Thankfully, you don't have to re-purchase every
spell for each character that may want it. A single purchase unlocks each spell
for anyone in your party who has the ability to cast it. I like this because it
means money is still relevant for casters. Getting to a town and visiting the
magic shop(s) to see what new spells I can buy is far more exciting than
increasing my damage/defense by a few percent by swapping out equipment. At the
same time, it allows me maximum party flexibility. I can make as many characters
healers as I want just by equipping the relevant jobs, and all will have full
access to my library of spells.

Now, onto the good stuff:

### The Job System

This is what really set the gameplay apart, and what made the Four Job Fiesta
possible in the first place.

At the start of the game, you have access to only the Freelancer job. It's
essentially a _generic_ job. It can possibly do anything, but it's not very good
at it (for now). Over time, story events will grant you access to new jobs. You
can switch them freely for all of your characters out of combat. This part is
very similar to FFIII (and FFIII's job system was one of my favorite parts of
that game, so that's a very good sign).

The big upgrade over FFIII is how you can blend jobs together. As you play with
jobs equipped, you level them up. Each level a job gains gives you a bit of a
stat boost while that job is equipped, as well as unlocking a new ability and/or
_mastering_ an existing ability. _Mastered_ abilities are unlocked for **other
jobs**. You can only equip one at a time, but that one ability slot amounts to a
surprising amount of playstyle customization---especially since you can swap
them at any time out of combat. Some of those abilities are passive, and some
are active. The passive ones tend to also come with some stat bonuses.

For example, I may not always want to spend mana for my casters to deal some
damage. It's often overkill to hit that random wolf at 10% hp with one of my
precious spells. Instead, I can get a few levels in monk on each character, and
then I can equip the "Barehanded" ability. This gives each character the
strength and health stats as if they were a monk, and allows them to punch for
high damage. So now, all of my casters will deal decent melee damage in a pinch,
and get a bit tankier as a bonus.

I wanted to add some more support spells to my White Mage, but I didn't want to
lose access to healing. So, I equipped the Time Mage with the ability to cast
White Magic, unlocked through already having mastered White Mage on that
character. Now I've got a character that can do support _and_ healing!

The Mystic Knight can empower its blade with spells, but this takes an
additional turn to set up and doesn't really pay off in damage. The primary
benefit usually is that you aren't _technically_ casting a spell on the enemy,
so it can't be reflected. However, giving my Mystic Knight a few levels in
Ranger grants it access to the Rapid Fire ability, which strikes 4 times at half
damage each. This is strong on its own, but in combination with the Spellblade
ability, only the physical damage is halved for each of the attacks. So it
effectively quadruples the spell damage.

The possibilities are endless. There are a ton of cool combinations for combat.

It goes beyond combat too! Some jobs have passive abilities for exploration and
utility. For example, The Mystic Knight can cast defensive spells on themself
automatically when at low HP. The Thief can spot hidden passages in the world.
The geomancer can spot pitfalls and traps. The Thief can improve your movement
speed on the map. The Chemist buffs every consumable item they use (great for
topping up the mana of other characters by using Ethers). These passives are
really useful, and I swapped between them constantly depending on the situation.

Everything changes once again in the endgame. That Freelancer job you start with
has a secret: It automatically equips every passive you've unlocked for that
character. It also has two active ability slots, you can make it a blend of two
other jobs. Since passive abilities also come with stat boosts, this means the
Freelancer gets better and better stats the more other jobs you've mastered. It
doesn't stack, but rather takes the highest boost to each stat possible from
your mastered jobs. It feels _awesome_. It feels like these characters are
really mastering their crafts. They're still specialized and unique, but given
more power by all the experimentation you did along the way. So you're not
punished for trying out more playstyles, you're rewarded!

There's also a Mimic job, which functions similarly to the Freelancer. It's
better for mages, as it can equip three types of magic, but loses access to some
other functions in trade. Freelancers tend to be a bit better for physical
fighters. It was really cool having three types of magic on each character.
There are so many types of magic in this game, and it's nice to actually use all
of them in the endgame. The Mimic also gets a "Mimic" ability, which repeats the
last used action in this battle. This got really silly when I used the Red
Mage's Dual Cast ability to twin-summon Bahamut, one of the strongest spells in
the game, and then had the rest of my party Mimic this.

![8x Bahamut per round. The boss was very dead.](https://i.kym-cdn.com/photos/images/newsfeed/001/798/217/449.gif)

This job system really made me enjoy _getting into random encounters_, to the
point that I often sought them out. It gave me that "just one more fight"
feeling. Every job levels up at a different rate, and some are very short
detours in your character progression. So my characters rapidly got out of sync
on job levels, but that was a good thing! It meant that every other battle,
_something_ would change in some way. My Samurai got a new badass ability. My
Geomancer just finished leveling and I can equip a new job on that character. My
usual healer just got to the level of Monk that they can punch things now, so I
can swap back to White Mage! It's a constant cycle of new elements being added
to the combat sandbox, and new strategies opening up. It's the most engaged I've
been with an RPG's leveling system, maybe ever? It's good.

### Blue Magic

This game introduced the Blue Mage job. You can't purchase spells for it like
the other casting jobs. You also can't go on quests to earn big spells like
Summoner does. Instead, this Job has a mini-progression system all for itself.
While having the job equipped (or the passive "Learning"), being hit by certain
enemy spells adds them to your Blue Magic spell list. This could be anything
from a standard damage spell, to a heal, to something that completely steps
outside of the usual magic system. Some of the craziest spells are on this list.
For example, Level 5 Death will instantly kill any target with a level divisible
by 5, even bosses! There are other spells you can learn to modify enemy levels
to manipulate them into being valid targets for this. That's just _one_ tool in
the massive toolkit Blue Mage offers. It's by far the most varied, versatile,
and powerful spellcaster in the game---it just takes more effort to build it up.

Oh man, I did not expect to like this as much as I did.

The spells are so cool and powerful that I wanted to gather them _all_. Every
zone, I looked up what spells I could earn, and I tracked them down
relentlessly. Some spells required using other jobs to set up the Blue Mage for
success. For example, an enemy won't usually cast a heal on you, but if you can
temporarily get them on your side, you can force them to do just that!

It's a really interesting, iconic system. It made me enjoy exploring even more,
and it gave me yet another source of progression to make the happy brain
chemicals go brrr.

### Quests!

Something of a smaller note, but I loved the sidequests.

There's this moment near the end of the game where you are told to go collect 12
legendary weapons. You can collect them in any order. The story is pretty much
halted at this time, which is a bummer---but this was still a fun quest to
tackle. Getting those weapons _really_ increased the power of my party. So I
prioritized getting the ones that would benefit me most. I then prioritized the
weapons that I could equip on the jobs I'd want to level soon, feeding back into
the excellent progression systems even more.

## Final Thoughts

**Rating: 8/10**  
_Playtime: 17 hours_

I really liked this one. The only thing that held it back was the story. It was
just a little too goofy for me. I'm sure some people hold this up as their
favorite story due to that tone, and they aren't wrong for that. It's just not
for me personally.

Even with the story that didn't appeal to me, I thoroughly enjoyed my playtime.
The gameplay really carried it, and I recommend it for that experience alone.

---

# Next Up

Final Fantasy VI! Very excited for this one. It's back to the serious,
story-driven style that I prefer. It's consistently one of the highest reviewed
titles in the entire series. It tops _almost every_ "best Final Fantasy" list
I've found. It's generally more beloved than even the community's darling FFVII.
Everyone claims this is because it has a truly remarkable and unforgettable
story. Will it live up to the hype? Will I enjoy it as much as seemingly
_everyone else_?

As always, _please look forward to it._
