---
title: Final Fantasy VIII
brief:
tagline: Ironically, a game ahead of its time
series: Final Fantasy Retrospective
tags:
- games
- reviews
published: 2025-06-13
updated:
toc_depth: 5
---

This game has one of the worst reputations in the series. New fans are
encouraged to skip it. Many echo this reputation without giving it a chance.
More people should try it. It's not perfect, but way better than it gets credit
for.

I think there are a number of reasons for this reputation.

This was, by far, the most experimental Final Fantasy game to be released yet.
FFVII already took a big leap into 3D, and Square chose to continue that
momentum into an even bigger leap. FFVIII had a _unique_ progression system that
diverged significantly from genre expectations. It had a different art style
than any other entry so far. The setting it took place in was very different
from the rest of the series.

It was also intentionally created to be an "opposite" of FFVII. In an interview
with Famitsu, the directors mentioned that if Final Fantasy VII was about "light
in the shadows", Final Fantasy VIII was about "shadows in the light". Meaning,
it's not about a dark world in need of a spark of hope, but rather that evil can
be lurking even in the seemingly brightest places. The world design reflects
this, filled with beautiful bright colors and prosperous civilizations instead
of the dark, dystopian world of VII. If fans wanted "another FFVII", this was
never going to be it.

FFVIII also has a problem with bad first impressions. Pretty much every
character, every gameplay mechanic, and every setting concept is introduced to
you at their respective worst parts. The characters start in bad places so you
can watch them grow. The gameplay mechanics give you the boring,
information-heavy parts up front. The setting starts confusing and mystified so
that you can uncover it as you go. It all gets better as the game continues, but
it takes faith and willingness to withhold judgement to get there without
already writing the game off.

Finally, and I think most importantly, it was simply _ahead of its time_. I look
at this game and I see a lot of elements that we now praise in modern games, but
got criticized at the time of this game's release. That art style that was too
different from the old ones? Every Final Fantasy game after IX uses it. Settings
that mix high fantasy and sci-fi more directly like this? Now, very popular.
Additionally, some of the more ambitious gameplay ideas may have been saved by a
few more years of aggregate industry knowledge and hardware improvements. In
particular, this game's UI is very dense and unintuitive. The complex systems
could be made far more accessible with a few more pixels to give the UI room to
breathe and give more clear indicators. This was a design fit for the console
generation that came after it.

Does that explain away all the flaws and turn this into a masterpiece? No. Of
course not. For every experiment this game tried that aged extraordinarily well,
another experiment flopped. Some of those flops were _pretty rough_, too. On the
other hand, there's some real gold in here, and I think it's been dismissed by
the community for far too long.

It's a great looking game, especially for the time it came out. I was
continually impressed by the cinematic flare it managed to pull off on a PS1. I
found this story very emotionally impactful and well written. For me, that's the
most important part.

Is this a perfect game? No. It's not even my favorite Final Fantasy so far. Do I
love it dearly? Yes. Absolutely.

---

# The Review {style="display: none"}

## Gameplay

I'll start with the bad news. This gameplay _was kinda shit_.

It has redeeming elements, and I appreciate the ideas that it set out to
accomplish. Unfortunately, the implementation was a bit overcooked. Worse, it
brought with it all of the things I liked least about VII's system without the
good bits.

### Transferable builds

I'll start simple, with what I disliked about both VII and VIII. I don't love
when a character build can be effectively copied to another character unchanged.
The characters (ideally) have distinct personalities, and I prefer for them to
have gameplay styles that reflect that. So I'm disappointed when all the
characters are blank slates, empty shells for me to fill with stats. Further, my
sense of investment in a character's battle progression is lost when there
aren't any significant permanent additions to them based on my choices. If there
are significant permanent changes, at least I can "make my own" distinct
playstyles for each character. I can make one more like a thief, and another
more like a mage or a warrior, or whatever. In a system like this, I can make
them more like a thief or a warrior **right this moment**, but that immediate
flexibility cheapens the distinction between the roles.

FFVII differentiates its characters slightly with different limit breaks, and
some minor stat adjustments that make the characters slightly better at one role
or another. In practice, that isn't significant enough to make the characters
feel distinct.

FFVIII does the same, but at least takes it 1/10th of a step further in that
some characters actually do have some meaningful base stats. For example, Squall
can never miss, and the player can force a crit (though, weaker than normal)
with well timed button presses during combat. So, any accuracy built onto him is
worthless, and building for crits is worth significantly less. Due to the way
the Junction system works, this does incentivize you to avoid certain build
choices on him. However, it's a pretty small incentive, and only really applies
to one character.

### Junction system pain...

Speaking of, let's tackle the Junction system. Once I wrapped my head around it,
I actually started to like it. It's sort of like a hybrid of the FFVI and FFVII
systems. You equip summons (called Guardian Forces in this game, more on that
later), as many as you want on each character. Having these summons equipped in
battle causes them to learn new abilities. However, the learned abilities stay
on the summon even if transferred to another character, like materia. The
additional, much more complicated part, is that each summon also has a set of
slots. These slots are overlaid onto your character's stats. For example, one
summon might have slots for strength and hp, and another might have slots for
magic and speed. What do you put into the slots? Magic. Every spell has
different affinities for being slotted into each stat, and it tends to follow an
intuitive logic. Cure type magic is probably pretty good at scaling your HP,
damaging spells are good at scaling your strength, you can put elemental magic
on your armor to resist that element, and so on.

All of those parts of the Junction system, I like. I would have maybe preferred
if Junctioning a Guardian Force to a character was permanent, but that's mostly
tangential. There's a lot of potential customization, and Guardian Forces are
both way cooler than materia and way more detailed than Espers/magicite.

The final catch is that magic is consumable in this game. Nobody is really
"naturally" good at magic in this world. If you earn 5 Thunder in a battle, you
get to cast Thunder 5 times. Additionally, junctioning 10 Thunders gives you
more stats than junctioning 5 Thunders, all the way up to 100. So, magic tends
to get hoarded. Casting it is only really effective in a handful of
circumstances, and definitely not worth it to spam when every cast is reducing
your stats.

That part is... annoying, but not unforgivable. As mentioned, magic is supposed
to be pretty rare in the world, and even the ability of the characters to earn
and spend this limited magic makes them exceptional. Plus, it isn't like any of
the characters feel like they were supposed to be mages and are being robbed of
that due to this system, the characters were designed with this setting
restriction in mind. So it feels far more fitting that everyone is attacking
with their weapons far more often. Now, is it a little more boring to only ever
hit attack instead of casting some more varied spells? Yeah... but if I'm being
honest, even my spell casting characters in earlier FF games ended up spamming
the same few spells pretty often. Still, I feel like this implementation could
have been better.

The truly irredeemable part is _how you get those spells_. There is a special
command that comes free with every Guardian Force, Draw. Draw lets you pull
magic from monsters (and occasionally loot it from the world, but that's more of
a bonus). You can either immediately cast a spell you drew (which is more useful
than it sounds), or store it away as part of your big ol' stash o' magic. If you
do the latter, you get a handful, like 3-7. This takes up your turn and causes
an annoyingly long animation with a harsh sound effect. Remember the cap for
each magic? Yeah. 100. So, if you want your characters to be strong---every time
a new magic appears, it's time to strap in to drag out a fight for 40-90 extra
turns. Probably more if you need to stop and heal occasionally, but you can
often put enemies to sleep to remove any possible stimulation and put your real
life self in danger of falling asleep at the same time.

Now, fortunately this isn't **forced**. You can get through the game without
_all_ of the magic, though you'll likely need to focus on some farming near the
very end to catch up. You also don't need to maintain a full 100 stack of magic
at all times, since even a partial stack of a stronger magic tends to be better
than 100 of a weaker magic. **Unfortunately, I have brain worms**. They whisper
in my ear, _you'll regret not being strong enough for the next boss_, _you'll be
frustrated if you feel like you missed out on character power instead of
provably losing to a skill issue_, _you don't really need those 10 minutes
anyways_. So unfortunately, I just couldn't find this style of progression fun.
This could have been way better if enemies simply dropped magic on death
instead, or if magic wasn't consumable at all and Guardian Forces could gain
access to spells as part of their progression like FFVI.

There are a few ways around that problem, but the game doesn't point them out
very well, and they're all way more complicated. For example, your Guardian
Forces can learn abilities to refine items into other items. This can include
spells. So, you could take monster drops and refine them into spells, but not
all monster parts become spells, and some are necessary for quests and crafting.
You can also buy items at shops or win Triple Triad cards, and refine those into
other items, sometimes spells. Sometimes, you get other items. So you'd have to
do multiple steps of transmutation to get X of this item to make Y of another
item so that you could make Z spells. Try to figure that out for all the dozens
of spells in the game, or take the long, mind-numbing, brute force approach?
Hope I don't get an RSI from all this button spamming, because I know my answer.

No matter what, to progress in the game you have to avoid playing the game. That
sucks. It's close to a really cool system. The implementation just sucks.

#### ...is all in your head

All of that said, it turns out, you can ignore all of that and it's fine!

The problems are driven purely by brainworms.

Slotting in a higher level spell is _so_ much more effective than stacking up a
maximum pool of the same old magic that it's barely worth worrying about. As
long as you throw out a few Draws whenever you see new enemies, you'll be plenty
strong. You can also melt down all your items that you don't need, which gives
you a wide array of powerful magic quite easily. Getting "good enough" in the Junction
system is easy...

_...but the brain worms don't **like** "good enough"_

So, by engaging with the Junction system, I found myself compelled to kill my
own fun in order to gain power. I imagine many other players experienced the
same thing.

What I find really interesting about this is how this aligns with the small
amount of lore we have on Guardian Forces and Junctioning in general. You can
find out in literally the first scene of the game (by poking through some lore
documents) that there is a cost for Junctioning:

Guardian Forces draw power from ideas, concepts, and emotions. The live in the
Junctioned user's brain, feeding off of their memories to grant themselves form.
Use of Guardian Forces has been associated with mental issues, including loss of
memories, especially those with strong emotions.

I think there's an interesting, probably unintended, parallel here. The
characters using the Guardian Forces are sacrificing their strongest emotional
memories to gain power. The players are choosing to engage in a mind-numbing
activity and/or put effort into memorizing a lot of item refinement
information, to gain power.

Do I think they intentionally released an unfun system to make the players feel
more immersed in the pain of the characters? No. That would be ridiculous.

Still, I find it interesting enough that I'll forgive the Junction
system after all.

**A little bit.**

### Unnecessary leveling system

Speaking of avoiding playing the game to progress, the level system is...
bizarre.

This game has automatic level scaling. The higher level you get, the higher
level your enemies become. You effectively never get an edge by leveling up.
Instead, you have to use the Junction system to get ahead of the curve.

Interestingly, enemies becoming higher level means they will start carrying
higher level magic. So, the higher level you become, the more magic you will
have to draw in order to stay ahead. Ideally, if you could max out 100 of every
spell available to you at level 1, and then stay at level 1, you'd never have to
draw spells again and you could stay powerful for the whole game.

Even more interestingly, the designers seem to have realized this. Almost all
forced story encounters give zero experience points, but do progress your
Guardian Forces significantly.

This makes every random encounter feel like not _just_ a waste of your time, but a
**punishment**.

This leads to a lot of tricks. If you can avoid gaining xp, that is better for
your character power level. Some abilities take enemies out of action without
granting xp, such as turning them into cards. Doing so also allows you to refine
them into magic and other items. So it's a win-win. However, that can be pretty
annoying, since you have to bring enemies to low HP without killing them. It
interrupts the flow of the game. You could also seek to skip as many fights as
possible, using abilities that reduce the encounter rate for example. All
solutions involve seeking to play the game as little as possible.

I bet the game would have been better without a level system at all, leaning
entirely on Guardian Forces for progression. I wonder if the fans would have
been even angrier at that deviation, though. The level system feels like it was
forced into the game to appease fans, and ultimately led to a worse game.
Sometimes, listening to fans is bad, actually, unironically.

### The good parts

As mentioned above, I found the Junction system to be really cool, in theory. I
wanted to emphasize that a bit more.

It's not just an interesting and unique system that would provide a huge amount
of character customization, it's also got some really cool ties into the story.
I'll go into more detail about that later, but in brief: This is a story about
connections between people, how they influence who we are, how they provide us
strength, and how they have a cost that is worth paying. Guardian Forces are
in-universe manifestations of that idea.

Also, the little touches of timed interaction during combat helped freshen it
up. It wasn't much. They were simple enough that I could challenge myself to
queue up other character's turns while timing the button presses for the current
character's turn. Only a few characters interacted with that system at all, but
I appreciated that it was there.

I really appreciated the simple cinematic gameplay elements too. Sometimes it's
cooler to throw a character into a cinematic minigame or add some quicktime
events than to boil a situation down to a combat, or worse, make it an entirely
uninteractive cutscene. There was a lot of variety in them too. There were so
many systems designed entirely for one-off scenes just to make the impact
greater (and it definitely worked). I was impressed.

There were also some surprisingly good QoL options. Don't want to mess around
with the magic sockets in the Junction system? Cool, hit the Auto button. It'll
ask you if you want weapon damage or magic damage, and it will optimize for you.
Don't want to worry about what abilities your Guardian Forces are learning? No
worries, they'll automatically switch for you. Swapping party members for a
story moment, and don't want to have to rebuild them? Easy, there's a one-button
"swap these characters' builds" solution, which even works if a party member is
temporarily unavailable.

Also Triple Triad is pretty fun. There's a reason it's one of the few Final
Fantasy minigames that made it into later games, and is super deeply integrated
into FFXIV.

Finally, this may be controversial, but I enjoyed being limited to 3 ability
slots. It made me much more conscious of my build choices. Having to choose, "do
I want this character to have access to magic or items?" was a tough, but
meaningful decision. It got even harder to choose (in a good way) when more
commands started becoming available through Guardian Force progression.

## Visuals

I think this is the best looking Final Fantasy game so far.

It took what VII started and improved on it. What I really appreciate is the
consistency. While VII jumps between multiple different art styles for combat,
exploration, dialogue, and pre-rendered cutscenes---VIII has a unified style
that makes everything feel much more seamless and grounded.

The value goes beyond simple consistency though. The single art style allowed
much more impressive transitions between gameplay and cutscenes. This is a very
cinematic game. Running from crashing and tumbling vehicles, fighting while
dangling from a rope beneath an out of control airship while an intense battle
rages in the background, tricking my attacker by hitting the emergency release
latch on the door behind me just in time---all of these are examples from a
single segment of gameplay. The camera could cut to pre-rendered cutscenes in
the middle of gameplay to get closeup shots or show off complicated animations
and it would feel perfectly natural.

Of course, unifying around an art style meant picking one of the several options
VII presented. I'm very glad they opted to go for the more "realistic" style
instead of the chibi one used for most of VII's gameplay. That chibi style was
the thing I liked least about VII, and I'm already disappointed looking ahead at
IX, even though they managed to clean the style up a lot. I've heard that IX
looks that way largely due to fan feedback on VIII, which is a bummer. Looking
even further ahead, the style FFVIII chose is the one that gets used for _all_
3D Final Fantasy games after IX. I guess people just weren't ready for it yet.

I played the remastered version, which I highly recommend. I liked everything I
saw. However, I'm still impressed by how the original looked.

This was the first game in the series, and one of the first games in general, to
use 3D motion capture. Way better and more natural looking than the robotic
motions of FFVII. To be one of the first games to use a technology still in use
today, it couldn't possibly be more ahead of its time. Fans at the time didn't
know how good they were eating.

Also, from my limited research, this was one of the first RPGs to pursue such a
cinematic style. VII toyed with it in a few scenes, but largely stuck to more
classic styles of cutscenes. To be fair, it's pretty hard to get those chibi
character models to look cinematic. But just look at scenes like
[this](https://youtu.be/LieneIWMbs0) from relatively early on. The closeups on
the dancers, the sweeping camera angles, the lighting, the gameplay mixed in,
it's all so good. I know "cinematic" has become a negative buzzword for games,
but I think it actually applies here.

This game often felt like it was being directed more like a movie, and that
really helped sell the emotional parts for me. It knew when it was okay to let a
moment sit in silence for a bit, and to let things slow down and drag out in
contemplation. It knew when to ramp up the pace because shit just got real. It
had some of my favorite representations of || timeline collapse || I've seen in
a game. It had some action scenes that felt right out of a spy movie or
thriller. Best of all, those scenes were all interactive. I never stopped being
impressed.

FFVIII feels like a much more modern game than it is.

## Audio

So many iconic tracks in this one. Some people joke that FFVIII is an extended
album with a game attached.

It's true! There are some great tunes in here. I knew right from the
[intro](https://youtu.be/XyBensMp_MA) that I was going to love this music
direction. It's dramatic as hell.

Speaking of drama, there's some top tier "such evil we now witness" music. For
example, [FITHOS LUSEC WECOS VINOSEC](https://youtu.be/Ff7P91YRP7U),
[SUCCESSION OF WITCHES](https://youtu.be/ITyJ9EQLlNo),
[Heresy](https://youtu.be/G7HyxzzPIHo), or
[Adel](https://youtu.be/S3-x0Tahe60).

There's more than just spooky stuff though, I've always loved this iconic
overworld theme, [Blue Fields](https://youtu.be/Tpfp5_5Xjms). I first heard it
in FFXIV, and now I've finally experienced it in its original form! It's such a
laid back exploration theme, with alternations between wonder and somberness.
Something about it just hits different during the early story of FFVIII. The
first time I hit the overworld and this played, it just felt so right.

Those battle themes are also iconic.
[The Landing](https://youtu.be/9ZbzWopOBTo) is a classic, as is
[Force Your Way](https://youtu.be/hSm6_VZuyok). Again, heard these a lot in
FFXIV. They rock, hard.

This game had plenty of "spy movie" action, with songs that matched, like
[Never Look Back](https://youtu.be/3IHTlHIRfVM). This hits so hard during tense
moments.

And of course, what would a romance about overcoming depression be without some
songs that melt your heart? [My Mind ](https://youtu.be/FmvRtPBXxjQ) is so calm
and touching. The perfect music for a heart to heart.
[Fragments of Memories](https://youtu.be/VrPQnadegBs) is devastating in context.
[Ami](https://youtu.be/ldbOpZmXp9Q) is more upbeat and playful, but man is it
heartwarming. [Where I Belong](https://youtu.be/_LkJe7vnyhk) is like a slower
and sadder version of it, too, just in case we needed a more sad version of
anything in this game.

I can't possibly end this section without talking about
[Eyes on Me](https://youtu.be/OYpHS6ffvVc) which is an in-universe romance song
written about two of the prominent characters, which becomes the the theme of
Squall and Rinoa's romance.

Nobuo Uematsu is, as always, a genius.

## Story

The story of this game has a reputation just as bad as its gameplay, but I found
myself pleasantly surprised. I found it much less confusing, much more
emotionally impactful, and much better written than I had heard.

I think some of the confusion some players ran into was due to not reading all
the materials made available to them. I do fault the game for not making it more
obvious that reading materials were actually important, but I really enjoyed
digging through the lore and figuring things out myself. It felt rewarding, like
I was unravelling a conspiracy on my own. The designers probably thought that
anyone interested in the lore would read, and anyone uninterested in the lore
would simply _go along with_ the plot. Unfortunately, people scrutinize things
far harder when they already aren't enjoying them. So even the people who might
have normally _just went with it_ were screaming "plot holes, contrivances, and
nonsense!" whenever they got to a plot point they didn't understand (because
they didn't read). The game definitely could have been made easier to understand
if all this necessary information was forced upon the player, but I'm not
convinced that's the right approach either.

I played this game over the span of several months. Not because I wasn't
enjoying it, but simply because this year has already had so many games
releasing that I've wanted to play. So it went on the back-burner. It was also
my Steam Deck game of choice, and I coincidentally had less Steam Deck time over
those months. Yet, even with weeks in between play sessions and months in
between major plot points (and plenty of time spent playing Triple Triad)---I
still followed this story just fine.

Something I didn't realize while playing, but I learned while researching to
write this, is that the localization for this game was pretty bad. Squall's
infamous "...whatever" response to every situation was not present in the
original script. He had a unique, and much more relevant response to every
situation in the original, and they all seem much more nuanced and interesting.
Further, they make him sound like much less of an asshole, because he's far more
tactful and diplomatic in the original. For a super simple example, a "my bad"
got turned into a "...whatever". Those are very different vibes! That said, he's
still a very apathetic character---but that's his arc! (Plus, he's still got
more personality even in his worst moments than Cloud did over an entire game).

### Jargon overload

Unfortunately, this game has an issue with too many barely-defined terms and
covering everything in its own jargon. Worse, these terms... sound kinda silly?

Some examples:

**Guardian Forces** - What? What are they guarding? Some things are vaguely
explained, but we're left to speculate. They are summons, which have been given
many names throughout the series, but this is possibly the dumbest name they've
ever had.

**SeeD** - Okay, the _Garden_ grows and produces **Seeds**. That much makes
sense, it's even cute. But why the capitalized **D**? Is it supposed to mean
something else, too? We'll never know...

**Junction** - This feels like a needless obfuscation. Sure, it _technically_
means connecting or joining things, but it feels like they cracked open a
thesaurus just to make it sound a little more technical, or mechanical. Maybe
that coldness is intentional, but I don't think it's worth the cost of making
everything sound more jargon-y. Worse, it's used in a few different ways in
multiple different places, adding to the confusion.

I really don't mind not being given all the details of lore like this. I often
find it's more fun to speculate and let my mind rush with possibilities than
have the details over-explained to me ahead of time. However, if the terms are
going to be entirely invented, I'd really appreciate learning _how those names
came about in the universe_. Or, at the very least, I'd appreciate those names
sounding cooler.

The game has a real problem with this, and even pokes fun at itself for it.
There's a town called Fisherman's Horizon. Sounds like a relatively
straightforward name, given that it's a city in the middle of the ocean.
However, through a sidequest, you can discover that the founder picked the name
essentially at random and had no reasoning behind it.

...Well, at least they're self-aware.

### Not enough setup

One of the main things that holds me back from calling this my favorite Final
Fantasy story is that a lot of plot points feel as though they were pulled out
of thin air. That's not a unique thing to the series---in fact, it might as well
be a hallmark of it. This might be the worst of the lot when it comes to this,
though. As detailed as this story is, there are some plot points that aren't
foreshadowed at all, and some that are just dropped entirely.

||Adel|| is a potentially very interesting villain, who pops into the story at a
time when the villain goalposts needed to be moved, only to be used as little
more than a plot device in everyone else's schemes. Maybe she's not important,
but I think she could have had a much larger impact had she been utilized
earlier and given more screen time.

Speaking of villains, this game keeps the true threat hidden just a little too
long. The reveal is dramatic, but the way it was done makes it feel like the
previous villain was rapidly ripped out from under the story, leaving it
stumbling. It also doesn't feel like there's enough prior support from the plot.
More scattered details, or whispers of her name, or anything really, could have
helped a lot. This in combination with the above makes it feel like "who is the
villain?" is a constantly moving target.

On top of that, because Squall is so unmotivated at the start of the game, we,
the players are left without any clear motivations for a long time. There's no
clear villain. There's no clear goal. We're just doing this because we're told
to. And again, that makes a lot of sense for how Squall feels at the time, but
it doesn't make for a very engaging early story.

Finally, one of the most controversial scenes in the game: basketball. I found
the presentation of this scene touching. There's something picturesque about a
heart to heart with friends under a sunset while casually shooting hoops on a
court shattered by war. The scars of war cover the characters as well as their
surroundings, but they still find a moment for some casual peace together. We
get a bunch of really well executed flashbacks that do a lot to sell the
emotions being talked about, and I love that too. That's not the problem though.
The problem is that it is suddenly revealed ||that they all grew up in the same
orphanage together, and that their Matron is the Sorceress they are trying to
kill, and that they forgot all of this. They all have the exact same amnesia,
woo!|| This, alone, isn't an issue either. Stories like that can really hit me
right in the heart. The problem is the suddenness. VII does a much better job of
foreshadowing very similar ||memory issues||, while it feels like this one
didn't try at all. So, all at once, the characters relationships with each other
and how they view their goal gets completely flipped. It's a bit much all at
once.

### Theories upon theories

This game's story leaves a lot of details vague, asking us to interpret it as we
will. I like this, even though I would appreciate some more detail in a few
places. This has led to a number of fan theories that attempt to explain some of
the crazier elements of the story. It's worth noting that all of these have been
denied by the creators, but I think they're worth talking about.

One of the most popular is that ||Squall is dead||. There's a point in the story
where Squall is ||severely wounded||, and it is after this that all of the
craziness of the story ramps up. This one is interesting, but I don't
particularly like it, because it feels like it undermines a lot of the core
themes. It feels more like an attempt to rationalize the story logically than to
understand it emotionally.

One I do like, is the very tragic ||Rinoa is Ultimecia||. In a world with all
these crazy powers, time travel of consciousnesses, and memory loss, it's
possible. I mainly feel attached to this one because it doesn't ever feel like
we're given a satisfactory backstory for ||Ultimecia|, she is simply evil
because she does bad things, and she does bad things because she is evil. This
would also draw another parallel between Squall and Rinoa's relationship and
that of ||Cid and Edea|| much like the parallel to Laguna and Julia. I'm also a
sucker for tragedy, and this would be a _massive_ one.

A half-baked one that I hold is that ||Time Compression|| has been active for
the whole story. We see such a massive gap in technology levels, which feel like
they are rising faster and faster as the story progresses. Almost as if they are
being accelerated by something. We get glimpses of the past, we see futuristic
technology, and we see it all mixed together in the present. Does that not sound
like ||Time Compression: the past, present, and future all combined in a single
moment||? This one has a lot of potential implications. Is the Junction system
something born from ||futuristic tech brought to the past||, or a manifestation
of fate making the ||time paradox|| possible? Are the main party coincidentally
brought together because ||they are still together, in the past||? Was ||Adel's
actions in the past, setting up Esthar for the future|| all a result of
||Ultimecia's|| plan? Is the reason everything worked out so well that the human
connections we see get formed throughout the story helped them choose from the
||infinite possibility of compressed time|| the perfect outcome? There's a lot
to think about, and it's a hard thing to get my head wrapped around, but I like
it. I think there are a lot of hints suggesting it, but they could just be
generic ||time travel|| hints.

### This is a story about...

This is a complicated story. Not just because there are some concepts involved
that are difficult to understand, but also because it's got several major themes
that all have intertwined arcs. These characters are more complex than they
appear on the surface---but you have to be willing to sit with them and let
questions linger in your mind a bit until they are ready to be answered, instead
of immediately assuming there are no answers and the characters are simple.

I'll break the different themes that spoke to me into different parts, and talk
about how they build on each other. However, this will be tricky, because they
also intertwine with each other so much that they're hard to separate.

In the following sections, I'll be discussing some spoilers. I will use spoiler
tags for all the heavy spoilers: twists, major plot events, emotional moments,
and so on. However, I will be talking openly about vague details of character
arcs, relationships, the setting, and so on.

#### ...growth

It's hard not to see the extremely blunt metaphor of all the characters starting
out as "seeds" departing the "garden". What else would a seed do? Sure,
character development is a given, that's not special, but the game tells us up
front that it will be particularly important in this story.

Why? Well, really, all of the below themes have growth at their core. However,
in this section, I'd like to focus on the themes of non-character growth that
are also present in the story.

Over the course of the game, the technology level you see in the setting
continues to rise. It starts out not that different from our own world, though
it could be assumed maybe a handful of decades earlier. People ride in cars.
There are modern day elevators. Computer terminals exist, but they are large and
only really connect to local-campus resources. When deployed on a mission, you
ride in boats that open ramps onto the beach to let you emerge onto the
battlefield. You learn that radio is the primary form of communication, and
long-range radio TV is a relatively special thing, used for state communication.

Then, another location has flying mechanical exoskeleton suits. Then, you see
soldiers in high-tech gear, exploring a huge excavation site filled with crazy
sci-fi stuff. Then, another location has massive cranes clearly used long ago to
construct some mega-structure. Then, || your school is revealed to actually be a
massive, flying mobile base ||. Then, you find your way into || an incredible
sci-fi city spanning most of a continent, with a population multiple times
larger than what you probably thought the entire population of the world was,
hidden behind holographic mountains ||. Then, || you go to space ||. Then, ||
you get a personal vessel capable of land, air, water, and even space travel ||.
Then, || it is revealed that the scientists have found a way to replicate unique
innate magic abilities by copying electrical brain patterns to achieve time
travel ||. It never stops growing. It never stops accelerating. As the stakes
rise, the tech level of everything around you is revealed to be way beyond what
you previously thought. If you didn't click any of the above spoilers, you can
probably still grasp how crazy it gets based entirely on how much I felt like I
needed to mark as spoilers. This technology represents one of humanity's
greatest strengths: the ability to grow.

Much deeper into the setting, buried in the lore, is the origin story for the
setting. Long ago, there was an incredibly powerful being named Hyne. He created
humanity as servants. They displeased him, by _growing too fast_. They grew
beyond what he intended for them. When they gained their own free will, he
declared war on them. Echoes of that war are the basis for the entire plot of
this game, and for the setting as a whole. Additionally, Sorceresses, those who
have inherited Hyne's power, don't ever really grow. They simply pass their
power on to their successors, replacing each other over time. That power is
never created or destroyed. I don't think it's a stretch to say this is a story
about the conflict between those who grow and those who remain the same.

#### ...responsibility

Squall begins this story as a student. He's about to graduate, but he seems to
just be doing so because those around him have ushered him along. He's going
with the flow. Graduating is just "what you do". He's gifted, and those around
him can see it. So, they pick up his slack and push him to continue along this
path. Hell, he even has a rival... one who he seems entirely disinterested with.

At every step along the way, Squall is frustrated when more responsibility falls
on his shoulders. Every time a new mission starts and a leader must be selected,
the others turn to him. He's bothered by this. Someone who was his instructor
only a few weeks ago will now be his subordinate. He doesn't want to accept
responsibility for anything that goes wrong. He doesn't want to be the _cause_
of anything going wrong. He lacks confidence in himself. Further, he hates
relying on others. He has resolved to only rely on himself due to some deep
rooted trauma, so he has trouble delegating. Early on, he's a pretty bad leader.

Over the course of the game, Squall begins to see gaps in the armor of all those
he deferred to due to his perception of their confidence. He begins to realize
that confidence isn't entirely involuntary. It isn't effortless for those around
him... they're just like him. They have concerns and fears just as much as he
does. They intentionally "put on" confidence. Some do it to hide their
insecurities. Some do it because somebody has to. Some do it to reassure others.

Squall grows. As new levels of leadership are placed on his shoulders, he begins
rising to the occasion. He starts to gain confidence in his choices. He stops
overthinking all the possibilities and paralyzing himself. Most importantly, he
learns to trust and rely on others. He learns his own reason for "putting on"
confidence.

By the end of the game. Squall is a damn good leader, and takes on some of the
highest imaginable responsibilities.

That's not the only place responsibility turns up in the story though. It turns
out, the other side of this conflict, Sorceresses, have very similar issues. The
power of a Sorceress is not always passed on to a willing host. The power _must_
be passed on, as a law of the universe, so sometimes not even the originating
Sorceress gets to choose. The power of a Sorceress is an extreme burden for many
reasons, and it is often simply dumped in someone's lap without warning. The
game shows multiple choices a new Sorceress could make, along many different
extremes, and the outcomes those bring. It shows that the power of a Sorceress,
their _responsibility_ is not important in those outcomes. What is important, is
what they _choose to do with it_.

#### ...apathy

One of the most frequent criticisms leveled against FFVIII can be summed up in
one word: _"...whatever."_ Though this specific word choice was a localization
flub, the core argument doesn't change much. Squall seems like an edgy teen who
is hard to get attached to, because he doesn't care about anything. How do you
enjoy the personality of a character who never lets their feelings slip?

<details>
<summary>A sidenote about VII</summary>

I also had this issue with Cloud, until almost the very end of VII. He's
distant, and mysterious. This is important, because he needs to be mysterious
for the plot. We aren't allowed to peak inside Cloud's head nearly as much as
Squall's, because of that mystery. Cloud also is not allowed much significant
character development until very late in the game, because the mystery was
holding him back.

I had a much harder time connecting to Cloud. Squall feels, to me, like a much
better implementation of Cloud's character type. I find it frustrating that
Squall's quiet nature is pointed out as a flaw, while Cloud's is praised.

</details>

At the beginning of the story, Squall is emotionally distant (to put it
lightly). He experienced some pretty rough trauma and put up many emotional
walls. Backstory spoilers, though most of it is covered pretty early: || Squall
is an orphan of war. He grew up in a world that already took everything from
him. Then, even his found family at the orphanage was ripped away from him
without explanation, and while he was far to young to properly process that. ||
He then vowed to never rely on anyone ever again, to never invest emotionally in
anything ever again. He would not experience that pain again, even if it meant
feeling nothing.

When we meet Squall at the start, he's already lived through a decade of
severing his emotions. These habits are deeply rooted, pulled down by hooks of
even deeper trauma.

However, we get some other forms of interaction from Squall. He's got a _ton_ of
internal monologues. While he may be quiet, and outwardly uncaring, the inside
of his head is a never-ending torrent. He's constantly worried about all the
possibilities. He's constantly thinking about others. He's constantly thinking
very deeply about a wide range of topics, often introspective. He'll ask to
himself, "Why _do_ other people rely on each other?" and go off on a long
internal monologue while he tries to figure it out. He compares his
interpretations with those held by others and tries to find those logical
conclusions. Crucially, he often asks questions he can't find the answer to.
These questions are the seeds of his growth.

The other characters quickly learn to read Squall when he gets lost in his own
head. So even when Squall says very little, the other characters can react to
his internal monologues, as if they understood what he was thinking. This lets
us get that inter-party communication that would have been lacking if Squall was
truly silent. It also gives us a better peak into Squall's head than we've had
for any other Final Fantasy protagonist so far, as well as the emotionally
satisfying arc of the team coming together to understand Squall and to help him
come out of his shell.

I would argue that Squall is actually the most interesting Final Fantasy
protagonist so far.

I found myself relating to Squall, a lot. No, I've not gone through the cruel
tragedies he has. No, I've not experienced the insane pressure he gets placed
under. But I've been hurt. I've given up on feeling. I've chosen to shut myself
in and let know one approach my heart. I've chosen to sacrifice my own joy out
of a perception that I didn't deserve it. I've worried and worried and worried
about every little detail of every possible way I could be perceived. I'm better
now, but I've been there. So watching Squall overcome all that was really
touching for me.

Squall slowly learns to express his feelings to the others over the course of
the game. It's not easy. It never is. But he gets better at it. At the very end,
Squall cries out. He truly relies on his friends and trusts them with his whole
heart, and all of the vulnerability that comes with that. This happens at the
literal climax of the story. It couldn't be more clear what the real final boss
was, but just in case, we get another metaphor:

Squall carries with him a ring decorated with a lion head. Squall says that he
loves lions, because they are strong and proud. Squall's ultimate weapon is
called Lionheart, and it's shown throughout the story that this lion truly does
represent (or perhaps, guards) his heart. || Rinoa and Squall end up exchanging
this ring a few times, as they dance around the romance budding between them.
When Rinoa is in a coma, Squall leaves this ring with her. When Squall is
desperate to reach Rinoa through a Junction, we're told "his heart reached her,
not his words" as we're shown this lion ring floating in front of her face and
reminding her of him. || This all comes back at the end. || The final boss is
that lion, made manifest as a Guardian Force. Squall must defeat his own pride
in order to finally, truly feel again. || Blunt? Sure, but I kinda love that.

As a side note, this gives me a theory about what Guardian Forces represent, but
it's all spoilers: || This makes me think that Guardian Forces are "emotional
walls", or perhaps "willful ignorance". I don't think it is a coincidence that
they feed on strongly emotional memories. Rather, they _repress_ them. All SeeD
party members grew up in the same orphanage, but after using GFs they all
forgot, because it would be painful to remember that they were torn apart and
are now hunting their "Matron". Squall's arc to learn to feel again is at the
center of the story, and Griever (the lion) is called the strongest Guardian
Force, and is pulled directly out of Squall. ||

> To tell you the truth... I worry too much about what others think of me. I
> hate that side of me... That's why I didn't want anyone to get to know me. I
> wanted to hide that side of myself. I hate it.
> 
> You were afraid of losing us? Is that why you kept your distance?
>
> I was always alone...
> 
> Squall... you missed out on all the good things in life. You've missed out on
> so much.

#### ...connection...

There are many connections between people in this story. Familial, romantic,
friendly, obligational, national... endless categories of connections. All of
them are examined, to show their impact.

At the center of it all, so core to the game that it is depicted on the logo, is
the romance between Squall and Rinoa.

##### ...and how it hurts

There are many, _many_ failed connections in this story. Obviously, all
spoilers, but you can probably get a rough idea just from the number of spoiler
blocks.

||Squall was torn away from his family, multiple times, due to the war. He never
knew his father. His mother died giving birth to him. His sister was torn away
without explanation. Even when he had friends in the orphanage, those memories
were stolen from him.||

||Cid and Edea were married, and ran an orphanage together, before Edea was torn
away and Cid was forced to become the head of an organization dedicated to
slaying her.||

||Laguna and Julia never worked out, though the song of their love is the same
theme played for Squall and Rinoa. Interestingly, Squall is Laguna's son and Rinoa
is Julia's daughter.||

||Laguna lost Raine, and unknowingly, his own son.||

||Quistis originally followed Squall because she had a crush on him, even giving up
her career to stay close to him. However, she backed off when Rinoa came into the
picture, and Squall remained clueless of her feelings.||

||Seifer always sought to be the Sorceresses Knight, but he always failed to be
useful, and was merely puppet being manipulated.||

||Laguna, Ward, and Kiros were torn apart by the war.||

||Raijin and Fujin were Seifer's best friends, his posse. But when he was being
manipulated by the Sorceress, they gave it their all to try and understand him
and maybe even bring him back, but they failed.||

That's not even a comprehensive list. The game shows us the cost of getting
close to someone, time and time again: they can be torn away. That, obviously,
hurts. It will always hurt. Squall's opinion at the start is that nothing could
possibly be worth that pain.

There's another cost: it's hard to be vulnerable. It's hard to let someone in.
It's hard to trust.

Additionally, our connections change us. We can't possibly remain the exact same
after letting someone else in. Inevitably, they become a part of us. Does
changing mean losing something? When we become someone new, do we lose our old
selves? There's a real fear there. We could respond to that fear by shutting
everyone out, never losing anything, never changing---but what potential do we
lose in that process?

I find it interesting that Guardian Forces are the other side of this coin. I
have a theory (mentioned earlier) that they represent emotional repression.
Guardian Forces are parasitic. Sure, they have utility, and they _can_ take the
pain instead of you, but they also harm those they inhabit by robbing them of
precious memories. Additionally, Guardian Forces harm those around you. Both
directly by causing violence, but also because they are the only source of the
Draw ability---the ability to steal the energy of others.

##### ...and how it strengthens us

It's not all gloom though, the game also shows clearly how our connections with
others bring us far more strength than anything we can find within ourselves.
Ultimately, it suggests that even if relationships have a cost, they are
absolutely more than worth it.

Early on, when Squall is a poor leader and he doesn't connect with anyone,
things constantly go wrong. He (and Irvine) keep trying to take things on
themselves, take the path of the loner, and power through. They are proved
wrong time and time again.

A moment I loved that shows this off very well was the end of the ||Sorceress
assassination|| mission. Irvine, the loner, the sniper, is in position. Unlike
Squall, he is confident. He still hides his emotions, but it's behind a veil of
collectedness. He shuts everyone out, focusing on preparing for his shot. Then,
when the time comes, || he chokes ||. Squall is confronted with an example of
the "loner path" failing, right in front of him. The confidence he once saw in
Irvine is shattered, and he sees Irvine be vulnerable. Squall at first is angry.
Then he recognizes the vulnerability, and adjusts. Squall gives Irvine a pep
talk that gives Irvine the strength he needs. In this scene, both Irvine and
Squall show more outward emotion than they have in the game so far.

Squall sees how he was able to connect with Irvine and that they were stronger
together. He begins changing his behavior around the others, being more mindful
of their feelings. It doesn't sink in for him until much later that everyone
else is trying to be mindful of his, too.

But... when he finally realizes it---when he finally starts relying on others,
the team _gets shit done_. They start absolutely crushing challenges far greater
than the ones they stumbled over at the start.

When Squall once more chooses to sacrifice himself, he doesn't realize how he is
causing pain to those around him. Rinoa chooses to || be taken to be put into
stasis because the world is afraid of her newfound Sorceress power. || Squall
decides that it is her decision to make, and resolves himself to suffer without
her. He doesn't think about how she was prodding him to give her the strength to
change her mind. He doesn't think about how the rest of the team would feel. He
just assumes this is how it always ends. Every relationship gets torn from him.
He was silly for thinking otherwise for once. This is his fault.

Then, the rest of the team shows up, he's given a pep talk that gives him the
strength to fight against the cruel fate he and Rinoa have been handed. I love
how this is handled. Selfie and Irvine, always impulsive, immediately take off
to try and fix the problem. Zell tries to appeal to Squall, asking if that's
what he really wants. Quistis gets _enraged_. She || had a crush on Squall, and
tells him that she gave up on it when it was clear that he and Rinoa were meant
for each other. She basically tells him, "you broke my heart, you asshole. Go
and get your girl already" || and it's exactly what Squall needed to hear.

This pattern of being stronger together culminates in the final plan. Everyone
comes together at the end. Every single connection gets pulled on, and everyone
has something to contribute. Through a mad plan only possible with everyone
together and a massive amount of faith in each other, they accomplish the
impossible, and || kill the Sorceress at the far end of time ||.

##### ...and how it can transcend any barrier

This is a love story, and love is shown to be the most powerful force of all,
the ultimate connection. In a world with so many other failed connections, we
get to see Squall and Rinoa, the one relationship that maybe has a chance at
working out.

My favorite sequence in any Final Fantasy game so far, is infamous. Is it corny
as shit? Oh yeah. Did it have a massive emotional impact on me? You better
believe it. Is it maybe a little slower than necessary? Maybe, but I think the
quiet contemplation works for it.

I really wish I could just put a link to a video here, but it's built up on such
a huge amount of context, it wouldn't hit right. I could write out the context,
or even describe the scene, but this is already getting long enough. But if you
play the game, and you get to ||The Space Scene|| you'll know. I'll at least
reference what happens in my examples below.

So, what was that about transcending barriers?

First, we're shown love transcending a barrier of time. || Ellone, Squall's
older sister figure from the orphanage, has a unique power to connect
consciousnesses of people she's met. So, they must connect to her, and she binds
their connections together, across a gap of time. Interestingly, it seems that
the strongest connections tend to win out, even when she doesn't try to force
them. For example, Squall was automatically connected with the past experiences
of his father, even though Ellone didn't try to make that specific connection.
This power is shown to even be able to change time, in some small ways that
don't cause a paradox, at least. Additionally, those in the past who receive
these connections end up mentioning how much stronger they feel whenever it
happens. This is probably due to the party's levels and magic transferring over,
but in the narrative, I think it's an affect of connections making you
stronger.||

We're even shown || quite literally || love transcending the barrier of space.
When Rinoa || is left drifting alone out in space, waiting helplessly to die,
Squall reaches out to her through Ellone. Ellone says his heart reaches her,
instead of his voice. Even as he screams out to her across the connection, she
does not hear it. But, as she is about to give up, as the last of her breath
leaves her, Squall's ring (his most prized possession, given to her while she
was in a coma) floats across her vision. She finds the strength to hold on, and
her suit kicks on an emergency backup oxygen supply. She's still stranded. Still
doomed. But now she has hope, and she's thinking of Squall. || Squall dives out
to save her, with an incredibly small chance of success, and throwing his life
on the line. A true miracle happens. Thanks to their love, Squall is able to
locate her and get to her in time.

And finally, at the end, when ||all of time is compressed|| part of the grand
plan is that the characters will have to think strongly on their bonds to make
it home. Lost in the swirling chaos, the only possible thing they can do is lean
on that hope. It turns out to be true. In a really touching ending sequence,
Squall cries out, releasing all of his repressed emotions. He calls out to his
friends, to his love. At first, it doesn't work, because he is trying alone. We
see some truly haunting stuff as he struggles alone against the anxieties of
infinite possibility. But when we see him cry out to each other at the same
time, it finally works. He is pulled out of the depressing darkness and into a
beautiful, joyful field of flowers. To the place where they promised to meet if
they ever lost each other, they crossed ||all of time and space, and infinite
possibility|| to reach it. Because ||time is compressed||, we get to see all the
characters' resolutions at once. It's touching. And then---Everyone. Goes. Home.

Love is the true, ultimate power.  
Cliche? Sure. I'm a sucker, sorry.  
I'll never stop enjoying stories like this.

> We're gonna make it home, right?
> 
> We can only hope.
> 
> I don't want the future. I want the present to stand still. I just want to stay here with you.
>
> I'll be here. I'll be waiting for you. If you come here, you'll find me. I promise.

## Final Thoughts

**Rating: 8/10**  
_Playtime: 25 hours_

Unfortunately, I think this game came out at the wrong time. The fans weren't
ready for it yet, and that left a long-lasting negative reputation. However, I
think there's a ton here that a more modern audience would adore, as long as
they could tolerate the issues.

I would love to see a remake of this that smooths out all the rough edges and
lets the good parts shine brighter than ever. I think there's a core to this
game that is really, really good, and I want more people to experience it.

...and I think people are finally coming around on it in recent years. I've been
seeing more and more positive buzz about FFVIII online lately. I'm really hoping
this trend continues.

This is not my favorite Final Fantasy game. It's got some pretty glaring flaws.
I love it regardless. I think it has had the deepest emotional impact on me so
far, and I'll be thinking about this one for some time.
